See	discussions,	stats,	and	author	profiles	for	this	publication	at:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/222149203

Fostering	quality	data	in	food	composition
databases:	Visions	for	the	future

Article		in		Journal	of	Food	Composition	and	Analysis	·	June	2004

DOI:	10.1016/j.jfca.2004.03.026

CITATIONS
61

1	author:

READS
106

Barbara	Burlingame
Massey	University

135	PUBLICATIONS			1,635	CITATIONS			

SEE	PROFILE

Some	of	the	authors	of	this	publication	are	also	working	on	these	related	projects:

Sustainable	diets	in	the	context	of	sustainable	food	systems	View	project

Mediterranean	diet	View	project

All	content	following	this	page	was	uploaded	by	Barbara	Burlingame	on	17	August	2017.

The	user	has	requested	enhancement	of	the	downloaded	file.

ARTICLE IN PRESS

Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 17 (2004) 251–258

JOURNAL OF

FOOD COMPOSITION

AND ANALYSIS

www.elsevier.com/locate/jfca

Fostering quality data in food composition databases:

Commentary

visions for the future

Barbara Burlingame

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, Rome, Italy

Received 21 October 2003; received in revised form 12 February 2004; accepted 2 March 2004

Abstract

Food composition data are currently being used in ways not well-anticipated several years ago.
Consequently, some of our criteria of quality, of both data per se and of databases, need to be re-examined,
expanded, or otherwise adjusted. Among the key criteria for reassessment for the future vision are the
concepts of representativeness, completeness, and a harmonized approach. The controversial issues related
to these concepts are food biotechnology and biodiversity, climate change and other environmental
phenomena, risk assessment, trade and regulatory requirements, and evidence for diet/disease relationships.
r 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Conventional criteria have long been established for judging the quality of food composition
data and databases. More recently these criteria have been formalized and assessment tools have
been developed for some individual nutrients (Mangels et al., 1993), and generically for
unspeciﬁed nutrients (Holden et al., 2002). For assessing data quality, it has always been necessary
to look deeply into the origins of the nutrient values, and to go back farther than the laboratory
and the analytical methodology, all the way to the sampling protocols, the actual sampling, the
care in sample handling and storage. For generating quality data, the sampling plan is where data
quality begins. Whether generating new analytical data or assessing existing data, quality criteria
will always be fundamentally related to the numbers at every stage: the number of samples
collected, the number of samples prepared for analysis, the number of discrete samples analyzed,
the number of analytical replicates, the number that represents the best value, and the number

E-mail address: barbara.burlingame@fao.org (B. Burlingame).

0889-1575/$ - see front matter r 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jfca.2004.03.026

ARTICLE IN PRESS

252

B. Burlingame / Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 17 (2004) 251–258

that represents the variability. Each and every number is relevant for inclusion in a high quality
database, for representativeness and completeness.

The processes for creating a high quality database require an understanding among all the
stakeholders regarding existing standards and requirements, so that databases can be prepared
and data interchanged without ambiguity or loss of information (Klensin, 1992; Greenﬁeld and
Southgate, 2003). To this end, some conventions have been established by the International
Network of Food Data Systems (INFOODS), EUROFOODS, and other organizations related to
food classiﬁcations and descriptions (Truswell et al., 1991; Møller and Ireland, 2000), component
identiﬁcation (Klensin et al., 1989) and data interchange protocols (Klensin, 1992; Schlotke et al.,
2000). More work is continuing in these technical areas (INFOODS, 2003).

Regardless of the evolving uses of food composition data, the changing perception and the
expansion of the concept of quality, conventional criteria will remain as the principal requirement
for quality. Nevertheless, environmental events of recent years—the rapidly diminishing existing
crop biodiversity, development of genetically modiﬁed organisms (GMOs), climate change and
other natural and human-made environmental phenomena—demand attention and action from
the food composition community. This, coupled with the changing morbidity and mortality
statistics requiring risk assessment and more food composition evidence to establish diet/disease
relationships, should lead us to a re-examination of data and database quality. Key concepts
include representativeness, completeness, a harmonized approach and documentation.

2. Representativeness and data quality

‘‘Representativeness’’

is a word long used to assess data as suitable or not for a food
composition database. Early manuals and procedures required the compilers of food composition
databases to ask if the data were representative. Usually this meant, are they reasonable
representations of year-round, nation-wide means and good enough to permit the assessment of
nutrient intakes and their impact on the health of populations. If the answers were no, the data
were judged to be not of sufﬁcient quality for inclusion in national food composition databases
(Southgate, 1985). Later, the question of the representativeness of data was evaluated in the
context of ‘‘representative of what?’’ and therefore differed from application to application (Rand
et al., 1991). Since most food composition database were developed for assessing dietary
adequacy, representativeness still meant year-round, nationwide mean values, and either a
composite sample constructed from market share data or calculated values from data from the
analysis of individual samples. ‘‘Representative’’ is a word called upon by those who feel that
contaminant data have no place in a food composition database, since generally, contaminant
data are not representative of the food per se; they simply reﬂect some conditions of a speciﬁc time
and place. In all these situations, many data would be excluded.

‘‘Representativeness’’ is therefore ambiguous as it relates to quality. Some of the highest quality
data, when viewed against several criteria, come from non-representative sampling (e.g.
experimental plots; specially bred cultivars). Exclusion of data on the grounds of representative-
ness may have been a pragmatic approach in the days when the data were used primarily to assess
dietary adequacy, and before the widespread availability of powerful relational database
management systems and microchip technologies. However, the documented uses of food

ARTICLE IN PRESS

B. Burlingame / Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 17 (2004) 251–258

253

composition databases now cover many specialized ﬁelds in health, agriculture, trade, food
science, environmental sciences, and economics and therefore the concept of representativeness
must be revised. Many high quality data from experimental plantings, non-commercial cultivars,
single time periods or seasons, and small geographical locations are useful, important data.
Compositional data on speciﬁc cultivars are becoming increasingly useful for many purposes.
Huang et al. (1999) reported that sweet potato cultivars in some Paciﬁc Islands differed in their
beta carotene content by a factor of 60, and for reasons unconcerned with nutrient content, the
low beta carotene varieties were the ones promoted by the agriculture extension workers. Vitamin
A deﬁciency diseases are still pervasive in certain parts of the Paciﬁc, and therefore these nutrient
data, cultivar by cultivar, are absolutely basic to agriculture and nutrition policies and
interventions. Yet resources are insufﬁcient for this work in the Paciﬁc (FAO, 2003a), and in
many parts of the world.

The term ‘‘substantial equivalence’’ entered into force of law in Europe in the regulations of the
European Parliament (EC, 1997), and concerns novel foods and novel food ingredients, including
GMOs. According to this regulation, a novel food or GMO must demonstrate substantial
equivalence to existing products in regard to their composition, nutritional content, and level of
undesirable substances contained therein. The ‘‘competent authority’’ must be provided with the
necessary information, including the known results of all studies which have been carried out as
well as any other information available to demonstrate the equivalence and safety of the food.

The ability to assess ‘‘substantial equivalence’’ in GMOs requires compositional data on the
existing biodiversity of that food—i.e., the cultivars of a species. This information is lost to many
databases because individual cultivar data were not deemed representative. Samples were usually
collected, pooled and analysed as a big composite, or in some cases, individually analysed but
compiled only as a calculated mean. The recommendations of
the International Rice
Commission’s 20th Session provide some important directions for food composition data
generators and compilers (FAO, 2002):
The Commission recommended that:

1. Existing biodiversity of rice varieties and their nutritional composition need to be explored

before engaging in transgenics.

2. Nutrient content needs to be among the criteria in cultivar promotion.
3. Cultivar-speciﬁc nutrient analysis and data dissemination should be systematically undertaken.

3. Completeness

The issue of ‘‘completeness’’ provides one of the signiﬁcant quality dilemmas for food
composition databases. The ideal food composition database would provide data on all foods and
food components of interest to the entire spectrum of user groups. However, the ideal of a truly
complete database is an impossible objective (Greenﬁeld and Southgate, 2003).

There are two broad approaches to deal with the reality of the situation: (1) develop a strategy
for establishing priorities for selecting the food items to be included in a database based on
conventional data quality, and accept the fact of missing foods and missing food components
if analytical data are not available; or (2) provide a database with a mixture of data

ARTICLE IN PRESS

254

B. Burlingame / Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 17 (2004) 251–258

types—analysed, borrowed, imputed, best guess—with no missing ‘‘core’’ foods, and no missing
values for core components. Each approach has its protagonists.

This has been one of the more divisive issues when quality is discussed. It need not be, however.
For some user groups, completeness is a criterion of quality. A high quality database may contain
some low quality analytical data, and many non-analytical data from estimations and
calculations. As long as the quality of each value is properly documented, the database can be
regarded as high quality for reasons of its completeness.

The importance of a complete database of core foods and components (i.e., no missing key
foods or key nutrient values) is clear for evaluating dietary intakes from food consumption
surveys. Even though ‘‘best guess’’ or ‘‘best ﬁt’’ estimates are not of high quality, the complete
database provides a better tool for dietary intake assessments than one with missing values.
Charrondiere et al. (2002) reported errors of greater than 20 percent in some key nutrient
estimations when the database was not complete. Thus the complete database is of higher quality
even if some of the data are not.

Completeness, along with representativeness, has a new and compelling dimension in the age of
biotechnology. A complete database would be one that would present a comprehensive proﬁle of
nutrients, cultivar by cultivar, and allow the assessment of substantial equivalence. No such
database currently exists, and yet the concept of substantial equivalence has entered into legal
force, as described above (EC, 1997). Each and every food commodity needs such a database, and
some are in preparation (ILSI, 2003). Limiting the process is the scarcity of analytical data, because
of the scarcity of funding, on the intraspecies differences in composition. The irony is that expensive
biotechnology is moving forward rapidly to improve the nutrient contents of food plants, when the
existing biodiversity may already provide such a cultivar. A comprehensive analytical program of
nutrient content of germ plasm could provide the data to answer that question, and also provide
the data to deal with substantial equivalence if GMOs are judged to be needed.

The divisiveness continues when deciding what constitutes the details of completeness. In
FAO’s Basic Statistics Division, composition data not accompanied by refuse values render the
database incomplete and of poor quality. For others essential data may include phytates, scientiﬁc
names, speciﬁc cultivar data, individual fatty acids, and more.

In the area of diet and disease relationships, a comprehensive examination of the nutrients in
the food supply of a country is fundamental. In the recent joint report of the World Health
Organization and the FAO on nutrition and chronic diseases, the strength of evidence for risk is
categorized as convincing, probable, possible and insufﬁcient (WHO/FAO, 2003). Yet without
sufﬁcient quality and quantity of compositional data—nutrients, bioactive non-nutrients, and
contaminants—all diet/disease evidence would be insufﬁcient (Burlingame, 2003).

4. Harmonized approach

Very many things are not harmonized in our food composition arena. International standards
development has started, with some areas having well-deﬁned standards while others are loose and
contentious. Areas being addressed by INFOODS or its Regional Data Centres include the following:

* Component identiﬁcation;
* Food identiﬁcation;

ARTICLE IN PRESS

B. Burlingame / Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 17 (2004) 251–258

255

* Units and modes of expression;
* Data quality and integrity;
* International interchange formats.

Units of measure provide some rich case studies relevant to harmonization. The International
System (SI), the decimal system of weights and measures based on the meter and the kilogram, was
ﬁrst established in France in 1791 (Penzes, 2003). In 1866, the US Congress authorized the
use of the metric system and supplied each state with a set of standard metric weights and
measures.

Since then, the SI system has gained nearly worldwide acceptance (BIPM, 2003). Only three
countries have not designated SI as their ofﬁcial system: Liberia, Myanmar and the United States.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) provides the best illustration of
the consequences of not having a harmonized approach to units. On 23 September 1999, NASA
lost a $125 million Mars Orbiter because a Lockheed Martin engineering team used the so-called
English units of measurement, while the space agency’s team used metric units. Following an
investigation, the NASA Ofﬁce of the Inspector General’s report recommended the following:

‘‘By law and policy, the metric system is the preferred system of measurement within NASA.
However, our review found that use of the metric system is inconsistent across the Agency. A
waiver system, which was required by law and put into effect to track metric usage and encourage
conversion, is no longer in usey NASA’s program and functional ofﬁces should use SI as the
preferred system for interactions with the external community in public events, educational
materials, and web site viewing. English units can be presented parenthetically (NASA, 2001).’’
Nevertheless, NASA continues to present non-SI units—pounds, feet, Fahrenheit, miles—in its

web-based materials (NASA, 2003).

The Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, and most scientiﬁc journals in current
publication, speciﬁes to authors that the SI system must be used for reporting units of
measurement. Basic data for food composition include energy, and the SI unit for energy is the
joule. Yet the use of the non-SI unit for energy, the calorie, is widespread.

Fig. 1 shows the ratio of kcal to kJ used in the scientiﬁc literature, based on a review of CAB
Abstracts (CAB International, 2003). There has been a shift since 1975, when it was nearly 14:1 in
favor of kcal. In the 12-month period ending July 2003, the ratio was approximately 1.6:1, an
improvement, but still favoring the non-SI kcal. Surprisingly, of the more than 500 occurrences of

 

J
k
:
l

a
c
k
 
f
o
o
i
t
a
R

 

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

1972-5

1976-8

1979-81

1982-3

1984-6

1987-9

1990-1

1992

1993-4

1995

1996-8

2001-2003
1998-00

Source: CAB Abstracts, 1972-2003

Fig. 1. Ratio of energy values expressed as kcal:kJ in the scientiﬁc literature from 1972 to 2003.

ARTICLE IN PRESS

256

B. Burlingame / Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 17 (2004) 251–258

units of energy in the year’s abstracts, only 12 papers provided both units, and nearly 300
abstracts provided only kcal. The occurrences of kJ and kcal in the abstracts of nutrition journals
for the past ﬁve years in CAB shows that only the Journal of Food Composition and Analysis
strictly adheres to the SI kJ policy.

Many published food composition tables and databases present both units of energy, e.g. the
United States (USDA, 2003). A few present only kJ, e.g. South Africa (Kruger et al., 1998), while
a few others only present kcal (Tee et al., 1997). The Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations presents data on energy in kcal only in its statistical databases (FAO, 2003b).

The SI has been actively and passively endorsed by many nutrition-related international
organizations and learned societies, through afﬁliated and ofﬁcial journals which specify the use
of SI units, and by virtue of afﬁliation with the International Council for Science. However, at
least one nutrition journal currently states that SI units are no longer required (EJCN, 2003).

5. Documentation

The ﬁnal consideration of quality is documentation. In the era of microchip technologies, full
documentation is a reasonable expectation. This includes data and all metadata, in the form of
numbers, words, images, algorithms, and more. From the ﬁnest detail of the sample plan to each
and every raw analytical value to the most aggregated of ﬁnal mean values, the food composition
database can accommodate this documentation. Extensive documentation cannot be published in
simple food composition tables, yet it is the responsibility of the compiler to have all the quality
documentation recorded in the database and available when needed (Greenﬁeld and Southgate,
2003). Compromises are necessary when we report data, but one thing should never be
compromised and that is proper documentation. A dubious value can be captured in a database,
as long as it is documented as dubious.

6. Conclusions

Generating high quality data for a food composition database is often an expensive proposition
for both developed and developing countries. The cost of establishing and/or maintaining
infrastructures, equipment, personnel, and consumables can be prohibitive. The number of
analyses required per nutrient per food, in order for the value to be judged as high quality, is
likewise expensive. It therefore becomes economical for the analytical facilities used in countries
for food regulatory purposes and international food trade to be used as food composition
facilities and provide basic datasets to assess malnutrition and support the preservation of food
plant biodiversity.

As the future unfolds before us, we start to realize that issues of quality in food composition
work need to be re-examined. Some criteria by which we judge the quality of data will necessarily
remain unchanged. Other quality criteria need revision or redeﬁning. Examples include the
concept of
that may include
contaminants and other compounds.

‘‘representativeness’’ and the analysis of

the ‘‘total diet’’

ARTICLE IN PRESS

B. Burlingame / Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 17 (2004) 251–258

257

The need for scientists to proceed cautiously with the genetic modiﬁcation of the nutrient
content of foods, coupled with the need to proceed swiftly with the analyses, documentation and
preservation of
the often compositionally unique and rapidly diminishing existing food
biodiversity, is a new challenge for the food composition community. The recommendations of
the International Rice Commission (FAO, 2002) can serve as a useful model at the interface of
nutrition and biotechnology, whereby the nutrient content of the existing biodiversity of crops is
examined before engaging in genetic modiﬁcation of food crops. Nutrient analyses to identify
cultivars with superior nutrient contents are less expensive, less controversial, serve multiple useful
purposes, and for many crops may render genetic modiﬁcation unnecessary.

International support is necessary and INFOODS continues to provide assistance in standards
development at the international level, and training and capacity building at the national and
regional levels. However, international support for countries and regions is not sufﬁcient or
sustainable, and countries need to institutionalize food composition activities in both agriculture
and health. The areas described in this paper are no longer the future—they are the present—and
food composition scientists and organizations need to embrace them to ensure the quality and
relevance of their work.

References

BIPM, 2003. The Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM). http://www.bipm.fr/
Burlingame, B., 2003. Evidence for diet and chronic disease relationships requires food composition data. J. Food

Comp. Anal. 16, 109.

CAB International, 2003. CAB ABSTRACTS database, 1972–2003.
Charrondiere, U.R., Vignat, J., Møller, A., Ireland, J., Becker, W., Church, S., Farran, A., Holden, J., Klemm, C.,
Linardou, A., Mueller, D., Salvini, S., Serra-Majem, L., Skeie, G., van Staveren, W., Unwin, I., Westenbrink, S.,
Slimani, N., Riboli, E., 2002. The European Nutrient Database (ENDB) for nutritional epidemiology. J. Food
Comp. Anal. 15, 435–451.

EC, 1997. Regulation (EC) 258/97 concerning novel foods and novel food ingredients; OJ L 43/1 14.2.97. European

Commission.

EJCN, 2003. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. Instructions for Authors. http://www.nature.com/ejcn/
FAO, 2002. Report of the International Rice Commission 20th Session (23–26 July 2002, Bangkok), FAO, Rome.
FAO, 2003a. OCEANIAFOODS Food Composition Data activities. http://www.fao.org/infoods/oceafds.htm
FAO, 2003b. FAOSTAT, FAO Statistical Databases. http://apps.fao.org/.
Greenﬁeld, H., Southgate, D.A.T., 2003. Food composition data: production, management and use. FAO, Rome.
Holden, J.M., Bhagwat, S.A., Patterson, K.Y., 2002. Development of a multinutrient data quality evaluation system.

J. Food Comp. Anal. 15 (4), 339–348.

Huang, A.S., Tanudjaja, L., Lum, D., 1999. Content of alpha-, beta-Carotene, and dietary ﬁber in 18 sweet potato

varieties grown in Hawaii. J. Food Comp. Anal. 12, 147–151.

ILSI, 2003. ILSI Crop Composition Database. The International Life Sciences Institute. http://www.cropcomposi-

tion.org/

INFOODS, 2003. The International Network of Food Data Systems. http://www.fao.org/infoods.
Klensin, J.C., 1992. INFOODS: Food Composition Data Interchange Handbook. United Nations University Press,

Tokyo, Japan.

Klensin, J.C., Feskanich, D., Lin, V., Truswell, A.S., Southgate, D.A.T., 1989. Identiﬁcation of Food Components for

Data Interchange. United Nations University, Tokyo.

Kruger, M., Sayed, N., Langenhoven, M., Holing, F., 1998. Composition of South African Foods: Vegetables and

Fruit Supplement to the MRC Food Composition Tables 1991. Medical Research Council, Cape Town.

ARTICLE IN PRESS

258

B. Burlingame / Journal of Food Composition and Analysis 17 (2004) 251–258

Mangels, A.R., Holden, J.M., Beecher, G.R., Forman, M.R., Lanza, E., 1993. Carotenoid content of fruits and

vegetables: an evaluation of analytic data. Am. J. Diet. Assoc. 93, 284–296.

Møller, A.,

Ireland,

J., 2000. LanguaL 2000—The LanguaL Thesaurus. Report by the COST Action
99—EUROFOODS Working Group on Food Description, Terminology and Nomenclature, Report No. EUR
19540, European Commission.

NASA, 2001. Feb 20. Letter from the Ofﬁce of the Inspector General: Assessment of NASA’s Use of the Metric System,

G-00-021. www.hq.nasa.gov/ofﬁce/oig/hq/inspections/g-00-021.pdf

NASA, 2003. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. http://www.nasa.gov/home/index.html
Penzes, W.B., 2003. Time Line for the Deﬁnition of the Meter. http://www.mel.nist.gov/div821/museum/timeline.htm
Rand, W.M., Pennington, J.A.T., Murphy, S.P., Klensin, J.C., 1991. Compiling Data for Food Composition Data

Bases. United Nations University Press, Tokyo, Japan.

Schlotke, F., Becker, W., Ireland, J., Møller, A., Ovaskainen, M.-L., Monspart, J., Unwin, I., 2000. EUROFOODS
recommendations for food composition database management and data interchange. J. Food Comp. Anal. 13 (4),
709–744.

Southgate, D.A.T., 1985. Criteria to be used for acceptance of data in nutrient database. Ann Nutr Metabol (suppl) 29,

49–53.

Tee, E.S., Noor, M.I., Azudin, M.N., Idris, K., 1997. Nutrient Composition of Malaysian Foods 4th edition. Institute

of Medical Research, Kuala Lumpur.

Truswell, A.S., Bateson, D.J., Madaﬁglio, K.C., Pennington, J.A.T., Rand, W.R., Klensin, J.C., 1991. INFOODS
guidelines for describing foods: a systematic approach to describing foods to facilitate international exchange of
food composition data. J. Food Comp. Anal. 4, 18–38.

USDA, 2003. USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference, Release 16. Nutrient Data Laboratory.

http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp

WHO/FAO, 2003. Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Chronic Diseases. Report of a Joint WHO/FAO Expert

Consultation WHO Technical Report Series 916. http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/005/AC911E/AC911E00.HTM

View publication stats
View publication stats

