 

Rural Transformation and Rural-Urban Linkages: The Case of Kampung 

Peruas, Malaysia  

Ibrahim Ngaha, Khairul Hisyam Kamarudinb, Hamid Saadc 

aCentre for Innovative Planning and Development, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 

bUTM RAZAK SCHOOL of Engineering and Advanced Technology, Universiti Teknologi 

cDepartment of Urban and Regional Planning, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81310 Johor 

Malaysia, 54100 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 

Johor Bahru, Malaysia 

Bahru, Malaysia 

 

 
 
Abstract 
 
This  paper  discusses  the  case  of  rural  transformation  in  the  context  of  rapid  urbanization 
process  in Malaysia.  Base  on  a case  study  of  Kampung  Peruas  in  Pahang,  we  illustrate the 
process of agrarian change in the village towards more diversification of economic activities 
in  particular  the  tourism  based  activities.  The  process  of  change  also  related  to  the  social 
economic relations within the locality and urban  centres in the surrounding regions. While 
the general trend of migration is towards the large metropolitan areas, the case of Kampung 
Peruas  did  demonstrate  the  existence  of  minor  stream  of  in-migration  to  the  village  in 
particular  the  return  migration  after  retirement  in  civil  service.  We  observed  that  the 
operation of small businesses run by the local people such as small chalet operators tended 
to have more linkages to the local economy such as through the purchase of raw materials 
such as for food and employment of local people. While the large tourist resort tended to 
employed  foreign  workers  and  maintain  strong  linkages  with  the  urban  centres  in  term  of 
obtaining supply of materials and business networks. This implies that development of local 
entrepreneurship  which  take  advantages  of  the  local  resources  is  important  for  the  local 
economic development towards wider distribution of benefit to the local people. 
 
Keywords: rural transformation; rural-urban linkages; role of non-farm; rural tourism 
 
 
 

1.  Introduction 

Rural  transformation  in  Malaysia  reflects  the  multi-dimensional  changes  towards 
diversification of rural activities with increases in non-farm activities, broadening of farm or 
land based activities and introduction of quality and local distinctive products (Preston and 
Ngah, 2012). The emergence non-farm and new form of agriculture practices in Malaysia are 
not  new  (such  as  multi-functionality  in  agriculture,  agro-tourism,  and  farmers  market)  but 
limited research has so far been done to trace their progress, performance and linkages to 
the local economy. The lack of acknowledgment on the role of non-farm activities and the 
new rural development practices (by multiple actors) is reflected in the continuous emphasis 
of rural economic development policy on agriculture sector. However throughout the world 
now attentions has been given to non-farm sector in rural areas as potential alternative to 
agriculture for stimulating rural economic growth and eradication of poverty (see Haggblade 

2 

 
et.  al,  2010;  Rigg,  2005;  Barett  et.  al,  2001).  This  paper  will  provide  insights  into  the 
contribution  of  non-farm  sector  in  rural  livelihood  and  how  they  are  linked  to  the  local 
economic  activities  and  wider  rural-urban  linkages  based  on  a  case  study  of  Kampung 
Peruas. 
 
There  are  various  evidences  that  indicates  the  growing  importance  and  tangible 
linkages  of  non-agricultural  activities  and  new  form  of  farming  with  the  local  economic 
development  among  rural  households.  These  linkages  are  mostly  observed  through  job 
creation  and  income  generation  of  rural  economic  portfolios/sectors.  Review  of  literature 
(see Mehta, 2009; CAP Reform, 2014 and others) shows that non-agricultural activities have 
significantly  influence  development  of  rural  regions  in  Africa,  Latin  America  and  Asia. 
Moreover,  rural  non-agricultural  activities,  together  with  the  emergence  of  a  more 
environmental  friendly  farming  practices/approaches,  have  served  as  ‘double-edge  sword’ 
which  allow  rural  households  to  generate  income  and  the  same  time  maintain  their 
livelihood  based  on  farming  and  land  based  activities.  Therefore,  it  is  critical  to  examine 
linkages of rural non-agricultural activities and new form of farming, and how these activities 
can be promoted into the development of an inclusive and sustainable rural societies. 

 
Three  rural  projects  related  to  non-agricultural  activities  and  new  form  of  farming 
linkages in Kampung Peruas are presented in this paper which spin-off enterprises already 
taken place in both activities. The nature of rural non-agricultural activities and new form of 
farming shall be explained in terms of backward and forward production and consumption 
linkages  with  agricultural  and  non-agricultural  focuses.  The  purpose  of  adopting  Kampung 
Peruas as case  study is to examine  the extent to which non-agricultural activities  and new 
form of farming linkages established at local community level through promotion of spin-off 
enterprises,  and  to  consider  how  these  existing  activities  and  linkages  could  be  further 
strengthened for sustainable rural development. 
 
2.  Background of Kampung Peruas 

 
Kampung Peruas is a traditional village  situation in Mukim Ulu Dong in Raub district 
Pahang which is about  36 Km from Raub Town  (Figure 1). The villages  has existed at least 
since 1890 and the first head of the village recorded was Khatib Mat. There were around 60 
houses with 228 people living in Kampung Peruas in 2015 (based on average 3.8 person per 
household)  and  the  current  head  of  the  village  is  Jamaluddin  Bin  Hj.  Husin.    The  main 
economic activities are agriculture, and tourism. The total land area is 478.3 hectares (1182 
acrea)  with  major  land  uses  consisted  of  agriculture  (including  orchard  and  plantation), 
housing,  natural  features  (rivers,  trees  and  shrubs).  The  villages  is  surrounded  by  hilly 
rainforest reserved which is rich in natural resources such as, flora,  fauna, rocks, rivers and 
the  Lata  Jarum  water  fall.  The  village  is  characterized  by  the  clean  and  beautiful  rivers 
flowing through the village, the traditional village houses scattered along the narrow roads, 
with matured durian  trees and several other fruits  trees shaded the houses  from sunlight. 
Smaller  flower  plants  and  herbs  along  the  pathways  added  to  the  diversity  of  shapes  and 
colours. The clean fast flowing river and the beauty of the kampong scene attract visitors for 
picnic during weekend as well as tourists. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

3 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1. Location of study area - Kampung Peruas, Raub, Pahang state, Malaysia. Source: Google map 

 
2.1 

History 

 
Search for literature and secondary report  and document  indicated that until today, 
there  is  no  record  and/or  proper  documentations  on  the  history  of  Kampung  Peruas.  The 
significant  (or  tragic)  event  that  marked  this  kampong  (village)  throughout  the  nation  was 
the  murder  case  of  Batu  Talam  Assemblyman  in  1994,  convicted  by  the  infamous  Mona 
Fendi  a  shaman  lady  with  her  husband  and  one  assistant,  an  Indonesian  worker.  It  took 
almost 69 days for the criminal court proceedings to conclude the case which Mona and two 
of  the  accomplices  was  found  guilty  and  were  sentence  to  death.  Due  to  limitation  of 
information/official  documents  regarding  the  history  of  Kampung  Peruas,  the  researchers 
had conducted in-depth interviews with few older people in the village to record and narrate 
their long experience and history of the village.  

 
According to Salleh bin Ali* (70 years old), among the earliest person to reside in the 
village  was  his  grand-grand  parent,  Pawang  Sidek.  Tok  Pawang  Sidek  had  two  children 
named Aki Iman and Aki Jana. Both Ali and his father (Salleh) were the progeny of Aki Iman 
and  they  claimed  to  inherit  the  Sharman/healer  capability  from  his  grand  father  (Tok 
Pawang Sidek). Another respondent, T.K† an owner of River View Chalet also claim that her 
grand-grand  parents  have  royal  blood  from  Pagar  Ruyung,  Indonesia  and  was  regarded  as 
one of the earliest settlers of the village. The designation of ‘Tengku’ for K, in Malay culture, 
is a direct indication of a person/their family to be associated with royalty or at least with a 
royal  decent.  In  this  case  however,  Tengku  Khamsiah  mentioned  that  she  does  not  have 
detail information about  the  history of her family. However, she did recall that her grand-
grand parents came together to Malaysia with three siblings, in which one of them migrated 
to Sri Menanti in Negri Sembilan and was said to be appointed as one of the local leader of 
the district.  

 
Salleh recalled that during his childhood, sometime in 1950s, the village infrastructure 
was not well developed, with many of houses were without water supply and electricity. The 
condition of village road was rather poor without proper pavement. People at that time dig  
wells  for  drinking  water  because  access  to  nearest  river  for  water  resource  was  not  easily 
possible due to the dense coverage of forest along the river. The livelihood of the people in 
                                                      
* Based on interview at his home in Peruas, July 2015. 
† Based on interview with TK who worked as a nurse in Selangor state and returned to Peruas upon retirement in 2013. 

4 

 
1950s  was  largely  depending  of  rubber  tapping  as  the  main  source  of  income.  Fruit  trees 
however were  planted around house  compound  for self-consumption. Salleh migrated out 
from the village to joint army in 1963 and after 14 years of service and upon his retirement, 
he  returned  to  the  village  in  1977.  He  still  remembered  when  he  returned  in  1977,  the 
physical environment of the  village  did not  undergone  much changes. He  built  a house on 
the land that he inherited from his parent and also bought a piece of land using the gratuity 
money (RM8000) and later sold it back at RM100,000. The money from the land transaction 
was used to construct the house that he is currently live in (after the first house caught on 
fire).  

 
Electricity  supply  and  piped  water  only  provided  by  government  in  1980s  after  the 
mini hydroelectric dam was constructed at Lata Jarum waterfall located at the village in late 
1970s. Source of electricity however was replaced with the national grid line system a few 
years later due to limited electricity generation from the mini-hydro scheme i.e. only capable 
to  provide  electric  supply  for  12  hours  daily.  The  laterite  and  gravel  road  that  provided 
access to Lata Jarum was only constructed upon the construction of mini-hydro dam. Before 
the project was initiated, the village and Lata Jarum area could only be accessed via jungle 
track from the village. The village people in the surrounding area used to visit Lata Jarum for 
the  annual  event  called  Mandi  Safar,  a  tradition that  owed  its origin  from  Hinduism.  With 
the coming of a more proper teaching of Islam, the Mandi Safar was later abandoned totally 
but people now days are still visiting Lata Jarum for picnic and leisure activities.  

 
According to Salleh, the village experience major transformation in 2000s when (late) 
Hj Mustapha who was originally from Kelantan migrated to the village in 1993, and later on 
(late 1990s) started the construction of chalets for tourism based activity on a piece of land 
at  the  river  side.  Hj  Mustapha  utilized  the  potential  of  the  river  as  main  attraction  to  his 
chalets by clearing a stretch of river bank that cut across his land and it became an attractive 
place  where  visitors  who stayed  at  his  chalets  used  to  take  bath or swim  in  the  river. The 
success of the  Hj Mustapha’s chalet  business  had opened the mind of other people in the 
village especially on the potential and prospect of tourism based activities. The realization on 
tourism  potential  has  in  turn,  encourage  the  village  development  committee  (JKKK)  to 
initiate  community-own  tourism  and  recreational  facilities  at  the  river  banks  near  to  Hj 
Mustapha chalets’ site which attract people from outside. 

 
The  main  recreational  area  in  the  village  is  Pulau  Chekas,  a  small  Island  that  forms 
from the split of the rivers and it was first developed in the middle of 1990s after the Monda 
Fendi tragedy. It started after a group of young people that organized an event at the site 
and they saw potential of that area to be developed as tourism attraction. Later, the village 
administration requested the part of rivers at Pulau Chekas to be adopted for management 
by the JKKK and a certificate of permission was issued by the Department of Irrigation and 
Drainage (DID). The Department also allocated some funding to support the development of 
suitable recreation facilities including public toilet, culverts and pathways. 
 
2.2  Administration 

 
The administration of Kampung Peruas is under the Village Development and Security 
Committee  or  ‘Jawatankuasa  Kemajuan  dan  Keselamatan  Kampung’  (JKKK)  headed  by  the 
head  of  village  (Ketua  Kampung).  The  first  head  of  the  village  was  Khatib  Mat  bin  Kassim 
who served from 1905 to 1935. Until today, there had been five successive heads of village 
in Peruas with the current Ketua Kampung is Haji Jamaluddin bin Haji Husin. The village head 
is appointed by the State Government after consideration the view of the village people, the 

5 

 
member of state assembly and the district officer where the village is located. The consent 
from district officer and the member of state assembly is important in term of admistration 
of the district  and  well as political interest  of the state as the head of the village  lead the 
admistration that directly link to people of  the grassroot. Other organizations established in 
the village are  the Youth Movement Association, UMNO (a Malay  political party), Mosque 
Committee and Teacher-Parents Association (PIBG). These associations are closely linked to 
JKKK;  for  instance  most  members  of  JKKK  and  Youth  Movement  Association  are  the  core 
members  of  UMNO,  while  the  head  of  the  village  also  held  important  positions  in  the 
Mosque Committee and PIBG. 
 
2.3 

Economic activities 
 
Agriculture  used  to  be  the  main  economic  activities  for  Peruas,  which  include  small 
rubber plantation holders and orchards and recently palm oil plantation. A few  people did 
make a living by collecting kantan flowers (etlingera elatior/ginger flower) that grow in huge 
amount  at  low-lying  areas  along  the  rivers  and  streams.  Tourism  on  the  other  hand,  has 
emerged  as  a  new,  non-agriculture  activity  for  Peruas  especially  after  the  construction  of 
chalets in the village in 2000s. Rural tourism has grown rapidly over the years and now days 
there are a few local chalet operators (small scale basis) and recently  a bigger investor from 
Shah Alam to purchase a land and built a nature based resort in Peruas (Table 1). 
 
Table 1. Information on chalets/resort in Kampung Peruas. 

Name of Chalet/ accommodation 
1.  MS Chemerkau Chekas Chalet 

Owner 
Hj. Mustapa bin Hj Kechik 

2. 

Lubuk Semak Chalet 

Yacob 

3. 
4. 
5. 

Kompak Homestay 
Riverview Chalet 
Tanah Aina Fahad 

Belia Chekas/Village Cooperative  
TK 
A company in Shah Alam 

6.  Dusun Tok Chalet 

Hj Mokhtar bin Omar 

Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015 
 

Capacity 
13 chalet 
6 VIP chalet 
4 dorms 
7 rooms 
+ camping site 
10 chalet + additional 9 chalets 
9 chalet 
High  end  resort  having  20  tents  with 
separate kitchen and toilets 
12 chalets + 2 dormitory 

Main tourism attractions are rivers, water fall, fruits, forest resources including flora 
and  fauna  and  clean  and  peaceful  environment.  The  good  quality  of 
low  cost 
accommodations  such  as  Chalet  Haji  Mustapha  attract  visitors  including  government 
agencies and private companies to come  to kampung Peruas for activities such as family day 
and  training.  They  also  offer  a  few  alternative  activity  packages  for  tourists  to  enjoy  the 
holiday  in  Peruas.  The  package  includes  stay  overnight  at  chalet  or  home  stay,  meal,  and 
tourism  activities  such  as  Kampung  Joy  Ride,  visit  waterfall  and  river,  and  ‘rafflesia  walk 
view’. The price is about 90 – 260 RM, depend on how long you want to stay.  

 
Among  younger  generations  many  work  with  government  and  private  sector  in  
nearby towns such as Raub and Kuala Lipis. There area  also quite a number of retirees from 
government  service  who returned  to the village  and  new comer  retirees  who bought  land 
and resettled in  the village. Recently, a famous artist Ismadi Sallehudin also established an 
art gallery in the village and become a place for his production of paintings and display area. 
His  gallery  has  started  to  attract  artists  from  overseas  in  particular  those  who  have 
networking with him. 

 
Another  new  economic  activity  introduced  was  Lebah  Kelulut  farming  (Stingless 
Bee/Trigona  Bee)  and  canopy  renting  business  initiated  under  the  Sustainable  Village 

6 

 
Program  of  the  Ministry  of  Rural  and  Regional  Development.  Both  businesses  were  run 
under village  cooperative and it employed local people. Kampung Peruas is an example of 
village  where  the  livelihood  of  its  people  is  closely  related  to  nature  and  appears  to  be 
harmonies with natural eco-system. 

 
Socio-Economic Profile 

3. 
 
This is based on socio-economic survey carried out in August 2014. We managed to cover 40 
households  out  of  60  households  in  the  village.  The  discussion  will  cover  age  and  gender, 
education levels, employment and income distribution. 
 
3.1  Age and gender structure 

 
As can be seen in Table 2, there were more male than female population and  based 
on  the  composition  of  population  aged  65  and  above  the  village  population  could  be 
considered  aging.  The  age  distribution  in  Figure  2  also  indicates  the  high  out-migration  of 
population  aged  between  20  and  40  years  old  and  also  reduction  of  birth  based  on  low 
composition of population aged 0-9 years old. 
 

Table 2. Age and gender structure 

Age group 

Male 

Female 

Total 

0-14 

15-64 

65+ 

Total 

Population 

19.0 

74.0 

6.7 

100.0 

130 

23.5 

58.9 

17.6 

100 

100 

20.9 

67.3 

11.4 

100 

230 

Source: Research fieldwork in August 2014 

 
 

 

7 

Figure 2.  Age structure of population in Kampung Peruas 2014. Source: Research fieldwork in August 2014 

 

3.2 

 
 
 
Education attainment 
 
Based on Table 3, the level of education attainment tended to be low as about 40% of 
the population aged 20 and above only managed to attain education up to primary school. 
Most of the low educated residents are among the older age group.  
 
Table 3. Level of Education Achievement of Population aged 20 and above 
Education attainment 

Female (%) 

Male (%) 

Total (%) 

Number 

No schooling 

Primary school 

Secondary school 

High education 

Total (%) 

Number 

6.1 

25.8 

57.5 

10.6 

100.0 

66 

16.3 

36.7 

40.8 

6.1 

100.0 

49 

10.4 

30.4 

50.4 

8.7 

100.0 

115 

12 

35 

58 

10 

115 

  

Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015 

3.3 

 
Employment 
 
In  Kampung  Peruas  43.9  percent  of  the  population  were    employed  including  those 
who have retired from public services but upon return to the village did some works in the 
village that produced income. Higher percentage of female were not working including the 
house wives and old women (widow) (see Table 4). The unemployed persons are those who  

8 

 
are looking for jobs. Most of them were young males or females with secondary education. 
A few were young married women who had no children.  

 
In our sample we found 13 retired civil servants who upon retirement returned to the 
village and 11 out of 13 did have jobs in the village. Many of the retirees were ex-servicemen 
in army and upon return involved  in village works such as tapping rubber, animal farming, 
fish farming. One of the retiree is the head of the village who upon returned to the village 
was  appointed  as  the  head  of  the  village.  A  women  who  worked  in  Selangor  established 
Chalets  in  the  land she inherited from    parents and her  job is managing the  chalets.  Only 
two of the retirees were not working due to old age. 
 

Table 4. Employment status 
Status 

Employed 

Not working 

Unemployed (looking for Job) 

Total  

Male (%) 

Female (%) 

Total (%) 

Number 

68.5 

28.1 

3.4 

100 

11.8 

80.8 

7.4 

100 

43.9 

51 

5.1 

100 

69 

80 

8 

157 

Source: Research fieldwork in August 2014 

 

Identifying the employment of the village people in Peruas was not easy particularly 
those who engaged in agriculture related activities. Many did several kind of jobs which we 
classified under farmers or village works. It included  rubber tapping, animal farming and fish 
farming (Table 5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 5. Types of Employment by gender in Kampung Peruas 2014 
Female 
Types of employment 

Male 

Total 

Farmers/village works 

Business 

Clerical and sale 

Teacher, Professional 

Factory worker 

Service worker 

Labourer 

Security Guard 

Others 

Total  

No 

32 

2 

1 

4 

1 

11 

1 

6 

3 

% 

52.5 

3.3 

1.6 

6.6 

 1.6 

18.0 

1.6 

9.8 

4.9 

61 

100.0 

No 

2 

5 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

8 

% 

25.0 

62.5 

12.5 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

No 

34 

7 

2 

4 

1 

11 

1 

6 

3 

% 

49.3 

10.1 

2.9 

5.8 

1.4 

15.9 

1.4 

8.7 

4.3 

 100.0 

69 

100.0 

Source: Research fieldwork in August 2014 

 

The main economic sectors were  agriculture and government services (Table 6). More 
people were entering into tourism sector including the chalet operators and workers. There 
are 6 chalet businesses in the village, two were own by the operators who did not live in the 
village.  One  owned  by  the  village  cooperative  established  under  the  JKKK.  The  most 

 
successful  chalet  operator  are  Cemekau  Chekas,  which  was  run  by  the  family  members 
consisted of the mother, a daughter and son- in law.  

 
Table 6. Distribution of Employment by Sector in Kampong Peruas, 2014 

9 

Sector  

Agriculture 

Tourism 

Construction 

Retail 

Manufacturing 

Government service 

Other services 

Total 

Male 

No. 

31 

0 

1 

0 

1 

10 

18 

61 

Female 

No. 

2 

1 

0 

3 

0 

0 

2 

6 

% 

50.8 

0 

1.6 

0 

 1.6 

16.4 

29.5 

100.0 

% 

25.0 

12.5 

0 

37.5 

0 

0 

25.0 

100.0 

Total 

No. 

33 

1 

1 

3 

1 

10 

20 

6 

% 

47.8 

1.4 

1.4 

4.3 

1.4 

14.5 

29.0 

100.0 

Source: Research fieldwork in August  2014 

 
3.3.1  Part-time job 
 

This included the job done on occasional basis. Among them are those employed by 
chalets’  operators.  For  example  Chemekau  Chekas  operator  employed  three  (3)  females 
from  the  village  when  they  have  visitors  for  assisting  in  preparation  of  food  and  room 
services.  Since  most  of  the  visitors  came  during  weekends,  the  part-time  job  were  only 
offered  during 
including  massage  service, 
carpenter/construction work which demand are not continuously available.  

the  weekend.  Other  part 

time 

job 

4. 

 
 
 
 
 
Contribution of Farming and Non-Farming Activities 
 
Table 7 shows the breakdown of total monthly household income of 40 respondents 
by economic activities and contribution of member of household.  Income from farming only 
contributed  20.7%  of  the  total  household  income.  The  contribution  of  income  from  other 
members of household was also important (44.2%) and remittance 7.4%. 
 

Table 7. Distribution of Total household Monthly Income According to Types of Economic Activities 
Percentage (%) 

Type of economic activities 

Amount (RM) 

Income from  farming activities 

Income from non-farming Activities 

Total income 

Income of head of household 

Income  from other members  

Remittance 

Total income 

Average monthly  household Income 

Number of households 

Source: Research fieldwork in August 2014 

18250 

69996 

88246 

42680 

39041 

6526 

88246 

2206 

40 

20.7 

79.3 

100 

48.4 

44.2 

7.4 

100 

  

 

10 

 
 
 
The  distribution  of  household  income  is  shown  in  Table  8.  Majority  (45%)  having 
household  income  between  RM1501-3000,  with  average  household  income  of  RM2206. 
Considering poverty line as per capital income RM200 and less, about 10% of the household 
were  considered  poor  (see  Table  8).  Table  9  shows  the  breakdown  of  total  monthly 
household  income  by  economic  activities  and  contribution  of  member  of  household 
according to quartiles. It indicates that the contribution of non-farm activities is important in 
higher income categories (4th quartile) and the contribution of other members of households 
is important as the level of household income increases. 
 

Table 8. Distribution of Household Income Kampung Peruas 2014. 

Household Income   

<RM800 

RM801-1500 

RM1501-3000 

RM3001-4500 

RM4500+ 

 Total 

N0 

7 

8 

18 

1 

6 

40 

Average Household income 

RM2206 

Per capital  income  

RM200 and less 

More than RM200 

 Number 

Average per capital 

Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015 

  

4 

36 

40 

RM646 

% 

17.5 

20.0 

45.0 

2.5 

15.00 

100.0 

  

  

10.0 

90.0 

100.0 

 

 
 
 
 
Table  9.  Breakdown  of  total  monthly  household  income  by  economic  activities  and  contribution  of  member  of  household 
according to quartiles 
 Category of income 

2nd quartile 

3rd quartile 

4th quartile 

1st quartile 

Income from  farming (%) 

Income from non-farming (%) 

Total (%) 

Income of head of household (%) 

Income  from other members (%) 

Remittance (%) 

Total (%) 

Total quartile  household income (RM) 

Av. monthly  household income (RM) 

Share of  quartile to total income (%) 

29.5 

71.7 

100.0 

62.3 

17.1 

20.5 

100.0 

7300 

730 

8.3 

41.9 

59.1 

100.0 

51.4 

39.6 

9.0 

100.0 

15275 

1526 

17.3 

23.1 

76.9 

100.0 

67.2 

27.6 

5.2 

100.0 

22971 

2297 

26.0 

10.3 

89.7 

100.0 

34.8 

59.5 

5.7 

100.0 

42700 

4270 

48.4 

Gini index= 0.354; Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015 

 
 
 
 
 

11 

 
5. 

Analysis of Economic Linkages 
 

5.1   Chalet Ms Chemerkau Chekas 
 

This chalet complex is located on a 2.25-acre land bought by the late Haji Mustafa in 
1992 using his pension as a GLC worker (former Tenaga Nasional Berhad employee). The first 
construction  activity  begin  in  2000  where  Haji  Mustafa  built  three  (3)  wooden  chalet  for 
accommodation. These three units was labelled as chalet no. 5, no. 6 and no. 7. However, all 
original three chalet are now been demolished due to poor condition and to make way for 
the  construction  of  new  accommodation  units.  Stage  two  of  construction  started  in  2004 
until  2006,  involving  the  development  of  three  (3)  accommodation  units,  followed  by 
additional six (6) more units i.e. four units at the front yard and another two at the back of 
management  office.  During  the  same  period,  Haji  Mustafa  also  constructed  the  main  hall, 
dormitory, prayer hall and an open air dining hall (temporary hall).  

 
A  more  proper  and  permanent  dining  hall  is  completed  by  the  end  of  2006.  All 
expenditure  or  cost  of  development  (physical/building  project  and  operational  costs)  are 
fully funded by the owner through internal financial sources including from personal savings 
and money from his pension fund (Employment Provident Fund account, EPF). From the very 
beginning  until  today,  MS  Chemerkau  Chekas  chalet  is  being  operated  without  any  bank 
loans or other external financial assistance.  
 
5.1.1  Brief background of entrepreneur: 
 

During the field visit, the researchers conducted an in-depth interview with Munirah 
(28  years  old)  which  is  currently  the  manager  of  MS  Chemerkau  Chekas.  She  has  been 
involved directly with management of all chalet activities ever since her father, Haji Mustafa 
passed away on 11th May 2014 (aged 64 years old). The late Haji Mustafa left a 59 years old 
widow and four children. The first of his child is Rosliza and he is currently work as a banker 
(Dataran  Maybank),  second  child  is  Rizman  (an  officer  at  Perbadanan  Kemajuan  Negeri 
Selangor, PKNS), the third child is Norha, a staff in TNB Lipis in Pahang and the  youngest is 
Munirah i.e. respondent of this survey. 

 
Munirah obtained her academic qualification (Diploma) in Business Management from 
Universiti Putra Malaysia (UPM). After leaving university, she has been brought into business 
and  management  of  chalet  by  her  father  where  her  primary  task  would  be  managing  the 
account  (including  booking  and  payment  from  clients).  Looking  at  the  history/story  by 
Munirah,  the  late  Haji  Mustafa  could  be  described  as  a  wise  and  a  visionary  businessman 
through his plan for grooming one of his children to be his successor to carry out his chalet 
business  in future. Munirah is now  married to Mohd Nazli (33 years old) with two sons (4 
years old and 2 years old respectively). Her husband is now involved actively in management 
of operation of the chalet. 
 
5.1.2  Non-agricultural activities and linkages 
 

Chemerkau Chekas Chalet (CCC) is the first chalet ever built in Peruas village and now 
being  considered  as  the  pioneer  of  tourism  development  project  in  Peruas  village  and  its 
neighbouring  areas.  Like  other  tourism  players  operating  in  Peruas,  CCC  operation  and 
management  has encountered  various  challenges  and  has  been  adopted  to many  changes 
taken place since it’s in operation. With a growing number of competitors into local tourism 
market  (as  explained  in  previous  section),  CCC  on  the  other  hand,  has  developed  its  own 

12 

 
business model with specific target market and tourist segment. According to Munirah, CCC 
operation is currently try not to compete with other chalet or tourism operators nearby. CCC 
does not rely heavily on weekend visitors or an individual tourist (or tourist in small group), 
but rather targeting a large booking for short stay by families (in bigger group) that come to 
Peruas  and/or  nearby  villages  for  wedding  ceremonies  and  special  occasions.  Majority  of 
CCC  clients/customers  consists  of  staffs  from  private  companies,  school  children  and  staff 
from government agencies which come and utilise the chalet for conducting courses such as 
induction camp and team-building exercises. 
 
Table 10. Types of accommodation and rates at CCC. 
Type of room 

Rate (/head/night) 

Total number 

Customer 

Dormitory  

School students 

Chalet 

Government agencies (KEMAS, JKR, 
Local Authorities, HKL) 
School students 

100-120 students 

60-100 people 

RM60 

RM68 

Did not specify 

Government agencies (KEMAS, JKR, 
Local Authorities, HKL) 
Jungle tracking, night walk, river crossing, swimming at rapids and visit to raflesia (flower). 

Did not specify 

RM60 + (50% increment per 
head from RM60)  
RM68 + (50% increment per 
head from RM68) 

Visiting package 
(Outdoor activities) 
Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015 
 

Based  on  information  on  tourist  arrival  from  the  respondent,  this  study  indicated  a 
pattern  of  seasonality  in  local  tourism  activity  of  Peruas  village.  In  the  beginning  of  May 
2015,  CCC  received  an  average  of  250-300  customers/visitors,  mostly  from  Kuala  Lumpur 
General Hospital (HKL), their biggest client at the moment (Table 10). HKL usually send their 
staffs  for  induction  camp  and  team  building  exercises  hence  booked  all  accommodation 
units at CCC along with other facilities that related to their courses. In average, CCC received 
about 60 participants from HKL with total visitation/frequency of twice a month (7 days per 
visit,  twice  a  month),  which  bring  a  total  of  14  days  of  full  booking  of  CCC  per  month.  As 
informed,  the  booking  by  HKL  for  their  induction  and  training  courses  continues  after  Eid 
(August  2015)  for  another  six  sessions  until  the  end  of  October  2015.  In  terms  of  the 
calculation  of  net  income  from  chalet  operation,  Munirah  adopted  a  formula  of  50% 
deduction from total revenue. During peak season (holidays and weekends), the net income 
could reach up to RM40,000/month.  
 

Table  11  shows  the  production  and  employment  linkages  of  the  CCC.  It  seems  that 
Raub  town  play  important  role  in  providing  the  supply  of  materials  such  as  construction, 
furniture  and  electrical  equipment  and  raw  material  for  foods.  Some  of  the  bedding 
materials and toiletries were purchased as far as Kuala Lumpur and Negeri Sembilan. 
 
Table 11. Production and employment linkages at CCC  

Material 

Source/Location 

Cost 

1.  Construction material (wood, cement, bricks, iron 

Local: Raub town (20km from Peruas) 

bars, construction tools) 

2.  Electrical equipment (television, electric kettle, fan, 

Local: Raub town (20km from Peruas) 

air conditioner unit, water heater)  

Depending on size 
of the project 
Did not specify 

3.  Furniture (chairs, beds, mattresses and side tables) 

Local: Raub town (20km from Peruas) 

Did not specify 

4.  Bed sheets 

IKEA (Damansara) 

Did not specify 

5.  Toiletries (soap, detergent and floor cleaner)  

Supplier from Negeri Sembilan 

RM1000/month 

6.  Clean/Drinking water 

7.  Electrical supply 

8.  Land 

Nearby stream (1km form the chalet) 

Free of charge 

TNB sub station 

Peruas 

RM1000/month 

Land owner 

9.  Dobby of cloth (pillow cases, bed sheets and 

Using own washing machine/facility 

No direct cost 

blankets) 

 

10.  Cooking (depending on program and number of 

participants): 

 
Chicken/poultry 
Vegetables, onions, spices 
Fish 

 
 
 

11.  Printing of brochure 

Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015 
 

13 

 
 
 
-  Local chicken supplier from Raub 
-  Tong Fat supermarket (Raub) 
-  Farmers market (Raub) 
Printing shop in Kuala Lumpur 

 
 
 
RM1000/day 
(minimum) 

Did not specify 

The  running  of  CCC  operation  has  been  entrusted  to  six  (6)  full-time  employees  (all 
local  people  and  all  of  them  are  female).  The  workers  are  responsible  for  housekeeping, 
general  cleaning  and  cooking  (Table  12).    At  the  moment,  Munirah  managed  to  provide 
Employment Provident Fund (EPF) contributions to five (5) of her permanent staffs including 
herself and her husband. CCC is currently not registered with Goods and Services Tax (GST) 
scheme as the current annual income is less than RM500,000.  
 
Table 12. Scope of work and daily payment for workers at CCC. 

Scope of work 
General cleaning and house keeping 

Cook 

Maintenances and trouble shooting 

Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015 
 

Working day and hour 
8.00 a.m. until 12.00 p.m. 
(on shift 5 days per week) 
Food preparation time and cooking time 
(minimum 3 times per day) 
On demand 

Salary per day 
RM20 

RM50 (minimum) 

Did  not  specify  (mostly  being 
carry out by her husband) 

In  order  to  understand  more  about  operating  a  tourism  business  (chalet),  Munirah 
participated  in  training  courses  provided  by  government  agencies  such  as  the  Ministry  of 
Rural and Regional Development and MARA. Up until today, she has attended short courses 
on e-Procurement, management of chalet, Halal certification and health and safety practices 
for chalet  operation. Since many of their clients are from government  bodies (schools and 
state  and  federal  government  agencies),  CCC  is  now  a  registered  company  under  the 
Ministry  of  Finance  (MoF)  Malaysia.  Under  this  registration,  CCC  can  accept  and  process 
Local Order (LO) from various government agencies and would receive the payments within 
two weeks.  

 
Marketing, promotion and dissemination of information at CCC is done through their 
website (http://www.msccchalet.com/). In the past, CCC has established marketing linkages 
with  tour  agents  to  bring  tourists  from  Klang  Valley  and  Singapore  to  Peruas  village. 
However, for a more quick response to potential customers, the marketing of CCC is being 
done  mostly via social media including Facebook, WhatsApp and emails to various schools 
administrations  and  government  agencies  in  Pahang  state  and  government  agencies  at 
federal level to promote the  activities and facilities  (Figure 3). The  use of social media has 
increased visibility of CCC, and it can be accessed worldwide. The application not only user-
friendly  i.e.  easier  to  be  understood  by  users,  even  the  content  administrators  (Munirah) 
could read and respond instantly to any inquiries, comments about CCC offers and facilities.  
 

14 

Figure 3. Marketing of CCC and its surrounding environment. Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015. 

 

 

 

With  the  growing  numbers  of  new  chalet  operators  in  Peruas,  CCC  decided  not  to 
compete with others in attracting small group or an individual tourist because the revenue 
would  not  be  sustainable  and  insufficient  to  pay  for  their  operational  costs.  Therefore, 
starting  2015,  they  are  focusing  on  bigger  number/group  of  visitors  that  would  like  to 
organise  family  day,  those  who  are  attending  wedding  ceremony,  schools  programmes, 
induction and team-building courses for private companies and government agencies.  
 
5.2 
 

 Tanah Aina Fahad (Chain of TA RESORT) 

A site visit and field observation also conducted at the newly constructed Tanah Aina 
(TA)  Fahad  Resort,  set on  8-acre of  land  located  near  Lata  Jarum  and  approximately  1 km 
from Pulau Chekas recreation area. This complex is owned by Tanah Aina, one of the major 
tourism player and investor with special interest in providing authentic visiting experience in 
rainforest settings. TAF also marked as the sixth eco-resort under the management of Tanah 
Aina  Eco  Tourism  Resort  (www.tanah-aina.com).  Considering  many  of  existing  chalets  and 
homestays are individually owned with limited financial and labour resources, the presence 
of  big  tourism  investor  with  big-scale/commercial  project,  might  pose  threat  to  existing 
community-based,  privately  owned  chalets  and  distort  existing  competitive  local  tourism 
market. At least that was the initial thought by the researchers. However, on the other hand, 
the  establishment  of  TAF  in  Peruas/Ulu  Dong  area  could  be  a  crucial  indicator  on  the 
potential of Peruas village and its surrounding areas/attractions to be promoted as a major 
node for sustainable rural tourism project. 

 
Through  a  more  detailed  observation  and  interviews  with  staffs  of  the  resort,  the 
presence of TAF in Ulu Dong/Peruas area would not directly affect nor distort existing local 
tourism  market  considering  the  nature  of  this  project  which  operating  using  different 
business model and targeting different segment of tourism market or tourists. TAF project is 
offering a high-end and exclusive outdoor camping experience including basic facilities (e.g. 
toilets  and  kitchen)  in  packages  for various  groups  of  tourists.  These  packages  range  from 
RM150  to  RM250  per  night  per  person  (refer  Table  2).  This  business  model, or  in  tourism 

 
planning is called “less is more” concept as it targets certain group of tourists who would pay 
more to enjoy nature. 

15 

Figure 4. A visit to camp site and inventory of facilities at Tanah Aina Fahad, Peruas. Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015 

 

 

As  for  accommodation  facility  and  capacity,  TAF  is  currently  providing  20  tents  and 
each tent could accommodate up to 6 person or in overall total of 120 visitors at one time. 
Other facilities include toilets, kitchen and dining areas (Figure 4). Kitchen and dining areas 
can be rented as separate package or can be included into visiting package. List of packages 
and prices are shown in Table 13. 
 
Table 13: Types of accommodation and charges at TAF Ulu Dong 

Price/Visiting package 

Tent 

Kitchen and 

Visitors/tent 

(RM/head/night) 

dining facilities 

(max.) 

Total cost in RM 
(6 visitors/night) 

  Without package 

150 

(RM/night) 

500 

 

 

Package 1 
(off-peak season or normal day) 
Package 2 
(during  peak  season,  holidays  and 
weekends) 

Source: Research fieldwork in July 2015. 
 

230/head/night  

250/head/night 

6 

6 

6 

1400 

 

1380 

1500 

TAF  is  currently  employing  15  workers  including  thirteen  (13)  foreign  workers  from 
Nepal and Indonesia and two (2) locals to carry out most of the maintenance works including 
general cleaning, housekeeping, gardening and security. Every worker will receive a monthly 
salary of RM1000. As shown in Table 2, TAF is focusing their business on a high-end and ‘less 
is  more’  concept  and  it  is  not  viewed  as  a  competitor  to  the  existing  small  scale  and 
community  based  tourism  operations  which  offering  a  more  affordable  accommodation 
facilities. Nonetheless, TAF is not  establishing any significant  linkages with local or existing 
economic  activities  (Figure  5).  Having  said  this,  the  presence  of  big  investor  and  tourism 
player such TAF did not bring spill effect that would boost local tourism activities considering 
management of bookings, promotion, marketing and transactions/payments are being done 
online  or  via  phone  call  or  via  office  visit  to  their  headquarters  in  Kuala  Lumpur.  The 
company  will  provide  a  bus/coach  to  transport  customers  from  Kuala  Lumpur  to  TAF  and 

16 

capital 

13 foreign) 

service providers 

No information on 

15 workers (2 locals, 

HUMAN RESOURCES 

Energy & water from 

and from Klang valley 

No information on furniture and 

      Production & Employment linkages 

Materials for construction 
bought from nearby town 

 
vice  versa.  Meanwhile,  majority  of  their  equipment  (tents,  building  and  construction 
materials, furniture, cooking stuffs) are not locally procured.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Targeting high-end 
markets/consumers  

(Both local and 
international) 

taxi, mini market or food stalls 

Main office is in Kuala Lumpur 

No link with tour agents/local 

No clear linkages with local 

No link with local tourism 

(Tanah Aina Fahad/TAF) 

ECOTOURISM MARKET 

Consumption linkages 

No link with training 

Forward 
linkages 

transport agencies 

other accessories 

LINK INDUSTRIES 

ENTREPRENEUR 

Land 
owner 

MATERIALS 

operators 

activities 

agencies 

Figure 5. Non-agricultural activities and linkages – Tanah Aina Fahad. Source: Authors (2015). 

 
5.3   Art Gallery and Workshop 
 

One of new attraction and probably will become the future tourism product of Peruas 
village is the art gallery and workshop which belong to Mr Ismadi (44 years old), a freelance 
artist (painter) specialised in fine arts (Figure 6). Mr Ismadi was originally from Peruas and 
his parents’ house is located near to his art gallery. Before moving back to Peruas, Mr Ismadi 
established his art career as a lecturer in Fine Arts in UiTM in Shah Alam, Selangor. He then 
moved to IKIP in Pahang to set up the art course there and appointed as Deputy Dean for Art 
School.  His  last  position  in  academic  world  was  as  the  Dean  of  ASWARA  (art  academy)  in 
Kuala Lumpur. Before Peruas, Ismadi resides in Bandar Tasik Puteri in Rawang, Selangor and 
at the same time managing his art gallery in Publica Mall, Kuala Lumpur. Ismadi moved back 
to Peruas a few years ago after his father passed away to care for his mother. Going back to 
his hometown has also provides him a bigger space for his art workshop and gallery.  

 
Mr Ismadi is currently employing eight (8) workers; consists of five (5) locals to carry 
out maintenance and gardening works, and three (3) young artists. His current project is to 
train  another  two  (2)  talented  local  youths  as  artists.  Moving  back  to  Peruas  village  is 
regarded  as  ‘blessing  in  disguise’  by  Ismadi  as  now  the  art  gallery  has  bigger  working  and 
exhibition space and he also able to provide accommodation for any artists/painters to come 
and stay at the village and his art workshop. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 6. A visit to art workshop and gallery and interview with Mr Ismadi, the artist and also the owner of the project.  

Source: Research fieldwork in 2015.  

 

Many of Ismadi’s artworks are displayed and sold both at the local and international 
markets. He  has also been invited to participate in international art festivals in the United 
States and Hong Kong. The price tag for his abstract paintings could range between RM500 
to more than RM100,000 per painting. With a growing interest from local and international 
art collectors and buyers, Ismadi foresees a good future for arts and other works related to 
creative industries to prosper. His art workshop and gallery could be the pioneer for training 
and creating public awareness about the potential of fine arts industry. Ismadi is more than 
willing  to  share  his  knowledge  as  an  artist,  producing  fine  arts  and  to  recruit  new  artists 
especially among local youths to be part of the project.  

 
From this research point of view, the art workshop and gallery could be a significant 
tourism  product  that  unique  for  Peruas  village.  Village  organisation  such  as  the  JKKK  and 
other  tourism  players  might  want  to  incorporate  the  art  workshop  and  gallery  as  tourism 
attraction. As for Ismadi, he could take the opportunity to work closely with JKKK to realise 
his future plan i.e. organizing training and workshop to create public awareness about fine 
arts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 

Production & Employment linkages 

Eight workers (5 

locals, 3 from 

outside) 

Capital (from personal sources), no 

link with any government grant 

Materials for paintings/artworks bought 

from Kuala Lumpur, Selangor 

HUMAN RESOURCES 

No information for furniture 

and other accessories 

MATERIALS 

No link with 

training agencies 

Energy & water from 

service providers 

Land 
owner 

Backward 
linkages 

ENTREPRENEUR 

(Art workshop & gallery) 

No link with local transport 

companies 

LINK INDUSTRIES 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

No link with tour agents or 

marketing agencies 

 
 
 
 

No link with current tourism 

activities in Peruas 

Consumption linkages 

All paintings are to be sold in Klang Valley 

and to the international art collectors 

MARKET 

(Both local and 
international) 

 
 

No clear linkages with local taxi, 

mini market or food stalls 

operators 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 7. Non-agricultural activities and linkages – Art gallery and workshop. Source: Authors (2015). 

6. 

 
 
Conclusion 
 
The paper has demonstrated a case on how the transformation of a village in a remote 
area  in  Peninsular  Malaysia  from  an  agriculture  based  economy  towards  non-farming 
activities. The growth of tourism based activities was associated with the natural resources 
in  the  village  and  the  role  of  capital  originated  from  urban  areas  tended  to  be  important 
including  the  locally  born  who  spend  most  of  their  working  life  in  city  and  returned  after 
retirement,  the  retired  new  comers,  and  urban  based  entrepreneurs.  Although  the  rural-
urban migration trend is prominent, there seems to be a relatively large number of return 
migrants in Kampung Peruas in particular those who had retired in government service such 
as  army,  navy  and  police.  The  role  of  retired  immigrants  tended  to  be  important  in 
supporting the economic activities in the village including the development of tourism sector 
and  providing  human  resource  in  agriculture  and  non-farming  activities.  The  paper  also 
provided  some  insights  into  the  nature  of  economic  urban  linkages  both  local,  urban  and 
international linkages. 

 
In term of tourism entrepreneurs we observed three distinct entrepreneurs. First the 
local  small  entrepreneurs  who  only  employed  family  labour.  These  include  small  chalet 
operators and homestay owners. Second is the return migrants and immigrants such as Hj 
Mustapha who have some capital to develop a tourist resort in slightly bigger scale and have 

19 

 
better exposure while working in cities. These two types of tourist business operators used 
both  local  and  family  members  as  workers.  Due  to  limited  marketing  and  low  level  of 
facilities provided the small chalet operators  tended to attract only local visitors including 
those who came for attending wedding ceremony of relatives in the village and government 
agents  who  visited  because  of    duty  in  the  villages.  The  third  category  is  the  urban  based 
entrepreneurs with  big  capital  and  manage  to  developed  higher  end  tourism  facilities  and 
employed more workers from outside particularly foreign workers. They are better access to 
modern  marketing  facilities  and  received  more  foreign  tourists.  The  rural  urban  linkages 
tended  to  be  stronger  among  the  bigger  capital  operators  who  purchased  goods  from  big 
cities. 
 

The  transformation  of  village  economy  towards  diversification  and  less  relying  on 
farming  activities  is  a  common  trend  in  many  countries  throughout  the  world  (see  Rigg, 
1998;  Barrett,  et  al.,  2001;  Haggblade,  et  al.  2010).  But,  in  Peruas  the  contribution  of 
nonfarm  to  total  income  in  Kampung  Peruas  was  more  than  75%  and  the  contribution  of 
head  of  household  to  the  total  income  also  decrease  as  the  income  of  the  household 
increase. An interesting finding relates to the role of retired immigrants in the village which 
tended to play significant roles in replacing the gap of human resources due to out-migration 
of the youths. This study also suggests the need to encourage local people to produce more 
raw materials to support the demand from tourism activities which currently being supplied 
from  large  urban  centres.  Most  crucial  is  to  produce  raw  materials  for  food  such  as  local 
vegetables,  chickens,  fishes,  lambs,  fruits,  traditional  foods,  and  crafts  that  could  be 
available in the village throughout the year.  
 
 
Acknowledgment 
The authors would like to acknowledge The Ministry of Education Malaysia for funding the 
research under FRGS Scheme.  
 
 
References 
 
Barrett, C.B, Reardon, T. and Webb, P. (2001). Nonfarm income diversification and household 

livelihood strategies in rural Africa: concepts, dynamics and policy implications, Food Policy 26, 
315-331. 

Berdegue, J.A et al. (2001). Rural Nonfarm Employment and incomes in Chile, World Development 

Vol. 29, No. 3, pp. 411-425. 

Common  Agricultural  Policy  (CAP)  Reform  (2014).  The  new  Common  Agricultural  Policy  schemes  in 
England:  August  2014  update.  Department  for  Environment,  Food  &  Rural  Affairs:  United 
Kingdom. 
at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/345073/cap-
reform-august-2014-update.pdf  

Available 

online 

Haggblade S. et. al (2010). The rural non-farm economy: Prospects for growth and poverty reduction, 

World Development, 38 (10), pp. 1429-1441. 

Mehta,  R.  (2009).  Rural  Livelihood  Diversification  and  its  Measurement  Issues:  Focus  India.  WYE 
Group  on  Statistics  on  Rural  Development  and  Agriculture  Household  Income  Second  Annual 
Meeting, 11-12 June 2009, FAO, Rome, Italy. 

Preston, D. and Ngah, I. (2012). Interpreting Rural Change in Malaysia, Singapore Journal of Tropical 

Geography, 33 (3), pp. 351-364. 

20 

 
Rigg,  J.  (2001).  Embracing  the  Global 

in  Thailand:  Activism  and  Pragmatism 

in  an  Era  of 

Deagrarianization, World Development, 29 (6), pp. 945-960. 

Rigg, J. (2005). Land Farming, Livelihoods, and Poverty: Rethinking the Links in the Rural South, World 

Development, 34 (1), pp. 180-202. 

Rigg,  J.  (2009).  Grand  narrative  or  modest  comparison?  Reflecting  on  the  ‘lessons’  of  East  Asian 

development and growth, Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography, 30, pp. 29-34. 

Tacoli,  C.  (1998).  Rural-urban  interactions:  a  guide  to  the  literature,  Environment  and  Urbanization, 

10(1), pp. 147-166. 

