 
by 
 

 

 

Geoffrey Hawtin1 

31 July 2007 

Contents 

Underutilized Plant Species Research and Development 

Activities – Review of issues and options 

A report submitted to the chairs of the GFU Steering Committee and the 

ICUC Scientific Advisory Board 

________________________________________________________________ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
Summary 
 
1) Introduction: 
2) Information sources: 
 
3) Opportunities and barriers to a greater use of underused species  
4) A brief global overview of research and development of underused  
    plants – potential partners for the new entity   

 
•  Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research  
 
•  Non-CGIAR Institutions involved in underused species 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

5) Need for, mission and objectives of the new entity   
 
6) Programme focus 
 
7) Institutional Options 
Nature of the institution 
 
Host institution and governance arrangements   
 
Location 
 
Staffing 
Lifespan 
 
 
Name  
8) Conclusions 
 
 
 
ANNEX 1   Terms of reference of the study 
ANNEX 2   The questionnaire 
 
ANNEX 3   List of individuals who responded to the questionnaire    
ANNEX 4   Results of questions 6a – 6n: 
 
 
ANNEX 5   Indicative list of institutions active in research and 
 
                   development of underused crops     
 
ANNEX 6   Institutional options – food for thought 
ANNEX 7   Possible names 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 

  2 
  9 
 10  
 11 

 

 13 
 14 
 18 
 20 
 22 
 47 
 47 
 48 
 50 
 52 
 52 
 53 
 53 

 55 
 57 
 62 
 63 

 66 
 74  
 78 

                                            
1Manor Farm House, 17 Front Street, Portesham, Dorset, UK. Phone: +44 01305 871043  Email: 
geoffhawtin@hotmail.com 

SUMMARY 

 

More than 7,000 plant species have been used for human food. However, recent 
decades have seen a small number of crops come to dominate agriculture, to the 
exclusion of many others. Yet a large number of crops that are now overlooked 
have the potential to play a much more important role in sustaining livelihoods 
and enhancing environmental health. ICUC and GFU are both active 
internationally in promoting and backstopping efforts to realize the potential of 
such species. While both are making an extremely valuable contribution, they 
recognize that there are areas of overlap and opportunities for building further on 
their complementarities. They have thus, in an unprecedented and voluntary 
move, expressed the desire to integrate their efforts. This report represents an 
attempt to evaluate the continuing need for services such as those provided by 
ICUC and GFU, and to suggest an appropriate institutional profile for a 
successor.  
 
The report is based on published documents and databases, interviews and a 
survey of key stakeholders to which 35 individuals responded. The author is very 
grateful to all who took the time and effort to express their views.   
 
Designing an optimal institutional profile requires an understanding of the major 
opportunities for, and barriers to the increased use of underused species, as well 
as knowledge about the work of other key actors in the field.  
 
 Opportunities for expanding use of underused species include:  

increasing opportunities for Fair Trade and e-commerce; 

the effects of globalization and the opening up of new markets; 

•  a growing interest in agricultural, market and dietary diversification; 
• 
•  a growing demand for familiar but possibly ‘lost’, traditional foods; 
• 
•  a growing interest in organic and nutritionally healthy foods; 
•  an expanding demand for herbal medicines;  
•  a growing interest in agro-tourism, increasing demand for local foods; 
•  greater interest by donors NGOs and others in safeguarding local culture;  
•  new opportunities for the production of biofuels. 

 
Barriers to capitalizing on these opportunities include:  

the erosion of traditional culture, values and practices, 
the often high level of home processing required; 
the lack of effective market research and intelligence;  
insufficient entrepreneurial expertise and product promotion skills; 

• 
• 
• 
• 
•  poor organization and weak links among actors along the value chain; 
• 
• 
•  a lack of access to affordable credit; 
•  a lack of genetic diversity, suitable varieties, and effective seed systems; 

lack of market access;  
inability to supply/obtain quality products when and where needed; 

 

2

•  uneconomic and/or unsustainable cultural practices; 
• 

remoteness, seasonality and/or harshness of traditional production 
environments;  

•  high levels of loss and quality deterioration in storage;  
•  a lack of attention to, and investment in, developing novel products. 

 
Underpinning the above is the lack of readily available information and 
awareness of their potential contribution, resulting in insufficient attention to 
creating a favourable policy environment and inadequate investment in R&D.   
 
Thus, the proposed new entity should focus at least on the following:  

•  Creating awareness: especially to help raise the status of underused and 

traditional crops, and create a more favourable policy environment; 

•  Promoting better information about, and access to markets,  
•  Supporting institutions that are addressing germplasm and production 

issues to help facilitate their work and to help provide a marketing 
perspective  

 

Many players are active in R&D of underused species: universities; international, 
national and state governmental institutions; NGOs; private companies and many 
others. Of particular importance as potential partners for the new entity are those 
that provide services to the underused crops community.  
 
Perhaps foremost among these potential partners are the Centres of the CGIAR 
and similar international or regional research centres (e.g. AVRDC, CATIE, SPC, 
and ACSAD). Several CGIAR Centres have worked on underused species for 
many years, e.g. ICRISAT on minor millets, ICARDA on grasspea, CIP on 
Andean roots and tubers, ICRAF on agroforestry species, IITA on Bambara 
groundnut, ICARDA, ILRI and CIAT on forages and Bioversity International 
(previously IBPGR and IPGRI) on a wide range of different species.   
 
The new ‘System Priorities for CGIAR Research, 2005–2015’ opens the way for 
expanding work on underused species. Priorities include:  

Increasing income from fruits and vegetables  

•  Promoting conservation and characterization of under-utilized PGR 
•  Genetic enhancement of selected high-value species 
• 
•  Promoting sustainable income generation from forests and trees  
• 
•  Making international and domestic markets work for the poor 

Improving science and technology policies and institutions 

 
The CGIAR has considerably expanded its work on underused crops in recent 
years and in addition to work on specific species, broader services are offered 
such as the on-line Agroforestry Tree Database at ICRAF, the Information Centre 
for Tropical Fruits at CIAT and the Platform for Agrobiodiversity Research at 
Bioversity International.  Several non-CGIAR international institutions also offer 

 

3

international services, including the Global Horticultural Initiative hosted by AVRDC 
and the species-level information services provided by PROTA and PROSEA.  
 
In addition to IARCS, national government sponsored R&D institutions also provide 
partnership opportunities. Perhaps foremost among these are agencies that 
provide technical assistance internationally such as CIRAD and GTZ.  
 
A number of universities around the world provide information and other services 
and are important potential partners. These include the New Crops Centre, 
University of Purdue, USA; the Australian New Crops Information Service, 
University of Queensland; the Southampton Centre for Underutilised Crops, UK; 
the International Initiative for Non-food Crops, Imperial College, UK; and 
AlternativeCropsCanada.org, University of Guelph.    
 
Many NGOs are also involved, ranging from small, local organizations (e.g. 
farmers’ associations) to international development NGOs and scientific 
societies. While most tend to focus narrowly on a few crops and/or locations, 
others, such as ISHS, have a wide and dispersed range of activities and could be 
important partners for the new entity.   
 
Private for-profit organizations range from small seed merchants and processors 
to multinational agro-industrial conglomerates and supermarket chains. They are 
an important client group and some could become key partners.  
 
Donors do not normally implement projects, although a few are actively involved 
in the projects they fund, such as the McKnight Foundation (USA) and ACIAR  
(Australia), both of which support projects on underused species.  
 
A number of networks/consortia are also potentially important partners including 
both national networks such as the All India Coordinated Research Project on 
Underutilized Crops, and international ones such the INBAR-led GFAR 
Partnership Programme on Non-timber Forest Products.  
 
Given the large number of institutions active in R&D of underused plants, is an 
additional entity needed, and if so, with what objectives? With respect to the first 
question, the answer is a definite ‘yes’. The large majority of respondents to the 
questionnaire recognized the importance of the new entity; valuable services 
would certainly be lost, and missed, if GFU and ICUC ceased to exist.  
 
There would also appear to be broad agreement that the mission of the new 
entity should encompass: enhancing the role of underused crops in improving the 
livelihoods and wellbeing of the world’s poorest people, in sustaining human 
cultures and in achieving a better stewardship of the environment. 
 

 

4

Overall, the new entity would have its greatest comparative advantage at the 
international and regional rather than national and local levels. It should give 
highest consideration to the following activities: 
 

1)  Providing information and communication services, building upon the work 

of GFU and ICUC: acting as a knowledge broker, or clearinghouse at the 
meta-level, providing a one-stop-shop to assist stakeholders; 

2)  Pro-actively analysing and synthesising data and disseminating results; 
3)  Promoting two-way communications;  
4)  Catalysing, supporting and adding value to the research efforts of others; 
5)  Fostering the creation of, and participating in (though rarely leading) 

regional and international consortia and networks; 

6)  Influencing policies, especially at the international and regional levels, 

through policy analysis and preparation of policy briefs; 

7)  Raising awareness among donors and key policy- and decision-makers, 

and thereby seeking to raise financial, political and other support; 

8)  Promoting improved market access through:  

•  maintaining a database, or linking to existing databases, of 

marketing expertise, both of individuals and institutions; 

•  conducting case studies and producing guidelines on best practice; 
•  promoting consortia that link producers, processors and markets;  
•  promoting the concept of value chains;  
•  supporting training in entrepreneurship, processing, marketing etc; 
• 

improving access to local and international market information  

9)   Although not a primary provider of education or training, the new entity 

should develop and provide access to training materials, influence 
curricula and provide information on education and training opportunities.  

10) While maintaining good donor relations and undertaking effective 

fundraising to support its own needs are essential, the case for helping to 
raise funds for others is less clear and should generally be avoided. 

If resources allow, the new entity might also give consideration to one or more 
of the following: 
 
1)  Undertaking analyses of secondary data and/or supervising students;  
2)  Developing and maintaining primary databases. However, this should only 

be taken on if there is a very clear need and a gap in existing services;  

3)  Promoting and supporting broad communities of practice. This might 

involve hosting web-based services such as on-line discussion fora and/or 
through an international newsletter; 

4)  Promoting and facilitating the development of generic concepts, models 

and decision tools – generally in partnership with other institutions; 
5)  Proactively facilitating the development of regional and international 

priorities and strategic frameworks, especially for regions not yet covered;  

6)  Providing guidelines and advice in monitoring and evaluation  

5

 

 

 

There are perhaps two main options for the modus operandi of the new entity: an 
institution conducting hands-on research, or a facilitating and catalytic service 
based largely on information and knowledge management. It is suggested that 
the second option is the most appropriate, although a minor role in research, 
especially in synthesising and analysing secondary data, should not be excluded.  
 
Institutional options for the new entity include establishing it as:  
•  a programme of another national or international institute.  
•  a System-wide Programme of the CGIAR 
•  a Challenge Programme of the CGIAR 
•  a consortium or platform for action 
•  an autonomous or semi-autonomous institution hosted either by a CGIAR 

Centre or other international or national institution  

•  a ‘free-standing’ international institution 

 
Based on the analysis of these options by Jaenicke and Hoeschle-Zeledon 
(2006) and feedback from the questionnaire and interviews, it is recommended 
that it be established as a new, semi-autonomous entity, hosted by a well-
functioning, technically appropriate institution. There should be a reasonable 
measure of independence from the host institution while at the same time being 
well positioned to capture programme synergies.  
To help ensure the new entity achieves its own strong institutional identity, it is 
suggested that it be established in its own right de novo, and not through a formal 
merger of GFU and ICUC or a take-over of one by the other.  
 
While the new entity will probably have to come under the overall fiscal, 
programmatic and governance arrangements of the host institute, to the extent 
possible the entity should be free to pursue its mission unhindered and in line 
with the directions set by its own oversight body.  Such a body could take a 
number of forms, from a purely technical advisory body to an executive steering 
committee having both programmatic and managerial decision-making authority. 
A small (6-8 member) Programme and Budget Oversight Committee might be 
one configuration worth considering, comprising individuals acting in their own 
capacity together with perhaps two ex-officio members: the entity’s CEO and a 
representative of the host institute.  
 
With respect to possible host institutions, the overall advantages of an 
international host seem compelling in terms of ability to provide an appropriately 
supportive environment. The ideal host institution would be working on topics that 
are closely related to the interests of the new entity and it should regard such 
hosting as being in its own programmatic interests. 

Institutions that best meet these criteria include, inter alia, AVRDC, Bioversity 
International, CIAT, FAO, ICARDA, ICRISAT, IITA and the World Agroforestry 
Centre. All have experience with hosting arrangements of the kind desired.  

 

 

 

6

Given the likely small number of staff members, it is probably best to centralise 
the institution in a single location. However, consideration should be given to out-
posting staff to other locations as and when opportunities and resources allow.  
  
A developing country location has the advantage of being close to a sample of 
the beneficiaries and ‘action’, and sends a strong message of commitment to 
development. Local staff and office costs are generally lower, but the pool of 
skilled people may be smaller than in a developed country. A developed country 
location, on the other hand, would help ensure that all developing regions get 
treated equally – or at least would help to assuage fears that this might not be the 
case.  Developed countries also, in general, tend to have better 
telecommunications and international travel connections. Fears that there could 
be less donor support if the entity were to be located in a developed country are 
probably largely unfounded. Whatever location is decided upon, it should ideally 
afford opportunities for interaction with a range of other relevant national and 
international institutions.  
 
Given the above, it is suggested that the following, at least, be considered as 
possible hosting institutions: 
•  Bioversity International, either at its HQ in Rome, Italy, or possibly at one of its 

regional offices 
•  FAO in Rome 
•  World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), Nairobi, Kenya  
•  World Vegetable Centre (AVRDC): with the Global Horticultural Initiative’s 

headquarters at AVRDC’s regional office for Africa in Arusha, Tanzania  

 
While it is it is believed that, overall, Bioversity International offers the best 
institutional hosting option, in large part because of the very strong programmatic 
affinity, others should not be ruled out. It is suggested that each leading 
candidate be canvassed regarding their interest in hosting, and under what terms 
and conditions. Once such information has been assembled, together with cost 
estimates of the various options, a final decision can be made.  
 
Funding realities are likely to determine that, at least at the outset, the staff 
complement be small. Expertise might initially be considered in the following four 
areas:  

•  crop production (diversification strategies together with participatory 

research and/or value chains)  

•  socio-economics/policy 
•  marketing/product development 
• 

information management  

 
One of these positions would be the CEO, with an added responsibility for 
management and fundraising. If additional positions were possible, consideration 
should be given to communications/public awareness and/or post harvest 
technology/processing.  

 

7

 
Of equal or greater importance to the disciplinary background of the staff is their 
‘people skills’: their ability to communicate and network, to build partnerships and 
to inspire confidence and trust.  
 
Given the proposed nature of the new entity, it is likely that it can serve a useful 
function for many years to come. However, it should be subject to regular 5-year 
external reviews with a possibility of termination if it is judged that the need for its 
services no longer exists or if it fails to meet clear milestones.  
 
Concerning the name of the new entity, the terms ‘underutilized’ and ‘neglected’ 
are considered to have a somewhat negative connotation and are probably best 
avoided. A term like ‘Service’ might be preferable to ‘Facilitation Unit’  - and both 
would give a more accurate impression of the entity’s proposed function than 
‘Institute’ or ‘Centre’. Given the advice for simplicity, ‘Global New Crops Service’, 
‘World New Crops Service’ or ‘New Crops Service International’ might be 
considered, or for greater simplicity, ‘New Crops Service’, ‘New Crops 
International’, ‘Crops of the Future’ or simply  ‘NewCrops’ or ‘Novoplants’  
 
In conclusion, there is a clear and on-going need for an international entity to 
help catalyse, backstop, promote and publicise work on underused crops. 
However, there is undoubtedly a minimum size – and critical mass of staff – 
below which the entity would risk failure. It is very much hoped that donor support 
will be forthcoming to not only guarantee such a minimum operation, but to go 
well beyond it, enabling the new entity to work and provide services across a 
much broader front. Such an entity would have much to offer and could help 
underpin the success of current and future efforts worldwide to capitalise on the 
potential of underused crops in the fight against poverty and malnutrition and to 
sustain the environment.

 

8

1) Introduction: 
  
Changing lifestyles and the increasing globalization of trade have tended to 
favour only a few major crops and these have come to dominate agricultural 
production, processing and commerce, nationally and internationally. The 
demands for research – and hence funding - have inevitably concentrated on 
these same commodities.  As a result, not only are a number of food species 
falling into disuse, to be replaced by the major crops and the products derived 
from them, but also many other species are similarly affected such as those that 
can contribute fibre, medicine, fodder, or construction material. However, these 
neglected and underused23 plant species are part of a rich economic, social and 
cultural diversity, and many have the potential to play a much more important role 
than they do today in sustaining livelihoods and human wellbeing and in 
enhancing ecosystem health and stability.  
 
Two small international institutions, the International Centre for Underutilised 
Crops (ICUC) and the Global Facility for Underutilized Species (GFU), have both 
been active internationally in promoting and backstopping efforts aimed at 
realizing the potential of these species to help alleviate poverty and protect the 
environment. They have acted through conducting hands-on research and 
development activities, catalysing and facilitating partnerships, brokering 
information and knowledge, and through backstopping and adding value to the 
initiatives of others. While both have made extremely valuable and highly 
commendable contributions acting individually, they have come to recognize that 
there are areas of overlap between them that would benefit from rationalization, 
and that there are excellent opportunities for building on their many 
                                            
2 Throughout this report I have used the term ‘underused’ rather than the more lengthy  
‘underutilized’ or ‘underutilised’, except when making a direct quotation. 
3 For the purposes of this report, ‘underused species’ are those that conform with the definition 
contained in the discussion paper: H. Jaenicke and I. Hoeschle-Zeledon, 2006: Contributing to 
the CGIAR System Priorities – The future of underutilized plants research and development:  

Species with under-exploited potential for contributing to food security, health 
(nutritional/medicinal), income generation, and environmental services. These species: 
• 

represent an enormous wealth of agrobiodiversity and have great potential for 
contributing to improved incomes, food security and nutrition, and for combating the 
‘hidden hunger’ caused by micronutrient (vitamin and mineral) deficiencies; 

•  are strongly linked to the cultural heritage of their places of origin; 
•  are mainly local and traditional crops (with their ecotypes and landraces) or wild species 

whose distribution, biology, cultivation and uses are poorly documented; 
tend to be adapted to specific agro-ecological niches and marginal land; 

• 
•  have weak or no formal seed supply systems; 
•  are recognized to have traditional uses in localized areas, but with considerable potential 

elsewhere ; 

•  are collected from the wild or produced in traditional production systems with little or no 

external inputs; 
receive little attention from research, extension services, farmers, policy and decision 
makers, donors, technology providers and consumers; 

• 

•  may be highly nutritious and/or have medicinal properties or other multiple uses. 

 

 

9

complementarities in a synergistic way. They have thus, in an unprecedented 
and voluntary move, recently expressed the desire for closer collaboration or 
even for full integration, in the belief that the new entity so created will have 
greater institutional efficiency and effectiveness. Thus an excellent strategic 
opportunity has now presented itself for an evaluation of the continuing need for 
activities and services such as those currently provided by ICUC and GFU, and 
an assessment of the role that such a joint or integrated entity could best play: its 
objectives, thematic and institutional profile, and the key institutions with which it 
should partner in achieving its mission.  This report aims to contribute to this 
process of integration through looking in more detail at these various issues. The 
terms of reference are given in Annex 1. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to express my very sincere thanks and 
appreciation to the leaders of both institutions (Drs George Rothschild and 
Hannah Jaenicke of ICUC and Drs. Eric Kueneman and Irmgard Hoeschle-
Zeledon from GFU) for inviting me to undertake this work, for providing me with 
appropriate background information and for taking the time to discuss their views 
with me. I would also like to thank all those who contributed either through 
responding to the questionnaire (see Annex 3) or who gave up their time to 
discuss the issues with me directly. In the latter category I am particularly grateful 
to Grahame Dixie, Senior Agribusiness and Marketing Advisor, World Bank, for 
his valuable insights and contacts, especially in relation to marketing.  
 
 
2) Information sources: 
 
The information contained in this report comes from a wide variety of sources. 
The overview of research and development of underused plants is  
based largely on information contained in the Medium Term plans (2007-2009) of 
the CGIAR Centres and the GFU database, together with a web sites of various 
international, regional and national organizations, and a few other documents, 
e.g. Williams and Haq, 20024  and Jaenicke and Höschle-Zeledon, 20065.  
 
In order to gain further insight into the potential role and responsibilities of an 
entity arising from the merger of ICUC and GFU, as well as suggestions 
regarding its organizational profile and modus operandi, a survey was conducted 
in which some 56 stakeholders were contacted and invited to fill in a 
questionnaire (see Annex 2).  There was a good return, with 35 (63%) of those 
contacted providing a detailed response (for a list of respondents see Annex 3).  
 

                                            
4 Williams J.T. and Haq N. 2002. Global Research on Underutilized Crops. An assessment of 
current activities and proposals for enhanced cooperation. ICUC Southampton, UK. 46 pp. 
5 Jaenicke, H. and Höschle-Zeledon, I. (eds) 2006.  Strategic Framework for Underutilized Plant 
Species Research and Development, with Special Reference to Asia and the Pacific, and to Sub-
Saharan Africa. International Centre for Underutilised Crops, Colombo, Sri Lanka and Global 
Facilitation Unit for Underutilized Species, Rome, Italy. 33 pp. 

 

10

In addition to the survey, a number of telephone interviews, direct, face-to-face 
discussions and email exchanges were held with several key individuals to gain 
further suggestions and insight into various aspects of the study.   
 
 
3) Opportunities and barriers to a greater use of underused species:  
 
Before considering the nature and profile of any entity arising from the merger of 
ICUC and GFU, it is clearly useful to first identify some of the major opportunities 
for increasing the production and consumption of underused species, and the 
major barriers to successfully achieving such increases. From such an analysis, 
coupled with an assessment of what others are doing to address these 
opportunities and challenges (see Section 4), it should be possible to design an 
institutional profile for the proposed entity that would maximize its impact and 
efficiency.   
 
Considerable thought has already gone into identifying opportunities and barriers; 
the GFU-ICUC Strategic Framework6, for example, provides an excellent 
analysis of these. The following lists, in no particular order of importance, some 
of the major opportunities for expanding the production and use of underused 
species, based on such analyses and the feedback provided by those responding 
to question 4 of the questionnaire:  
 

•  a growing interest in agricultural and market diversification by farmers and 

• 

other stakeholders active within value chains; 
the effects of globalization and the opening up of new markets 
internationally; 

•  a growing demand from urban consumers, especially in many developing 

countries, for familiar but possibly ‘lost’, traditional foods; 

•  an increasing interest in, and opportunities for Fair Trade and e-commerce 

marketing arrangements; 

•  a growing consumer interest in biological/organic agriculture, for which 

many underused species offer advantages; 

•  greater demands for increased dietary diversity: for novel and nutritionally 

healthy foods; 

•  an expanding demand for herbal remedies, both internationally and in 

situations where modern pharmaceuticals are unavailable or too 
expensive for local populations;   

•  a growing interest in eco-tourism and agro-tourism resulting in an 

increased demand for local ‘ethnic’ foods; 

•  greater interest by donor agencies, civil society organizations and others 

in helping to safeguard local culture and traditions, of which underused 
species are often a key component; 

                                            
6 See footnote 4, page 10 
 

 

11

•  new and rapidly expanding opportunities for the production of biofuels. 

 
While potential opportunities for increasing the production and consumption of 
underused species abound, with consequent benefits for producers, consumers 
and others operating at all stages along a given value chain, there are many 
barriers to realizing this potential. Such barriers can operate at all stages and 
levels along the chain and include, again in no particular order of importance: 
 

• 

• 

•  changing food fashions and habits and the erosion of traditional culture, 

values and practices, often associated with urbanization and globalization; 
the low status attached to many traditional foods and the often high level 
of home processing required; 
the lack of effective market research and intelligence to identify where 
demand exists or could be created (n.b. many crops/products are likely 
never to become economic);  
insufficient entrepreneurial expertise and product promotion skills; 

• 
•  poor organization, and lack of contacts and linkages among different 

• 

• 

actors along the value chain; 
lack of market access due to tariff and non-tariff barriers as well as 
difficulties created by distance, poor roads and transport infrastructure, 
cultural and language barriers, a lack of telecommunications, on-road 
taxes, control by cartels, etc.; 
inability to supply/obtain products when and where needed and in the 
quantity and of the consistency and quality demanded; 

•  negative effects of competition with large, often more economically 
efficient companies which themselves tend to concentrate on major 
commodities 

•  a lack of access to affordable credit; 
•  a lack of suitable varieties; most plant breeding effort goes into the genetic 

improvement of highly productive major crops; 

•  a lack, or inaccessibility of genetic diversity on which to base the breeding 

of new varieties (underused crops mostly lie outside the purview of the 
multilateral system of access and benefit-sharing of the International 
Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture. This can 
severely limit their availability for research and production); 
inadequate seed information, production, certification and distribution 
systems; 

• 

•  uneconomic and/or unsustainable cultural practices, exacerbated by a lack 

of research attention; 

•  many underused species are confined, perhaps through local 

adaptation/fitness to their traditional production zones, where remoteness, 
seasonality and/or harsh environments can limit opportunities to expand 
production;  

•  high levels of loss and quality deterioration in storage;  

 

12

•  a lack of attention to, and investment in, the development of novel 

products. 

 
Underpinning all of the above is the inadequate availability of information and a 
general lack of awareness by the general public, producers, consumers, policy 
makers, donors and others of the potential contribution that many underused 
species could make to economic, social and cultural development, sustaining 
livelihoods, enhancing human well-being, and contributing to ecosystem health 
and stability. Such a lack of awareness results in insufficient attention being given 
to the creation of a favourable policy environment for underused crops and to 
insufficient financial and human resources being invested in research and 
development.   
 
Based on the above overview of opportunities and barriers, it would appear 
desirable that the scope of work the of the new entity encompass at least the 
following:  

•  Creating awareness: especially to help raise the status of underused and 
‘traditional’ crops, and to help create a favourable policy environment in a 
wide range of areas such as for the marketing of novel products, for 
ensuring better access to credit, etc. 

•  Promoting better awareness of and access to markets, e.g. through 
promoting the concept of value chains, producing guidelines on best 
practice, providing appropriate information services, supporting training 
etc. 

•  Supporting institutions, of which there are many, that are addressing 

germplasm and production issues to a) help facilitate their work, where 
appropriate, and b) help provide a marketing perspective and to promote 
links along the value chain through processors and the developers of new 
products, to markets and ultimately consumers.  

  
The means by which the new entity might address such issues as these are 
discussed in more detail in section 6.  
 
 
4) A brief global overview of research and development of underused 
plants – potential partners for the new entity:  
 
There is a wide range of players active in research and development of 
underused species. Universities, international, national and state research and 
development institutions, botanical gardens, NGOs, private companies and many 
other types of institution all over the world are involved in one way or another. It 
is not possible here to do more than provide a brief overview of some of the 
major ones, although a more complete listing is provided in Annex 5. What 
follows is an overview of the work of the CGIAR Centres and a brief indication of 
some of the major programmes outside the CGIAR that seek to provide general 
services to those working on underused crops. It is with programmes such as 

 

13

these, in particular, that the new entity should seek to develop strong 
partnerships and to avoid competition. This review does not aim to be complete 
and apologies are presented in advance to the very many individuals and 
institutions that have not been referred to either here or in Annex 5.   
 
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR): 
From its inception the CGIAR has been involved in research on underused crops. 
Several of the so-called ‘mandate’ crops of the Centres, the subject of extensive 
breeding and other research at the Centres concerned, could be regarded as 
underused, to the extent that they are grown on relatively small areas and have 
the potential to expand in importance: pigeonpea (Cajanus cajan) at ICRISAT, 
lentil (Lens culinaris) at ICARDA and cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) and yam 
(Dioscorea spp.) at IITA might all be considered in this category. Furthermore, 
ICRISAT has a formal mandate for the conservation, characterization and 
distribution of the genetic resources of minor millets, which include foxtail millet 
(Setaria italica), little millet (Panicum sumatrense), Kodo millet (Paspalum 
scrobiculatum), Proso millet (Panicum miliaceum), barnyard millet (Echinochloa 
spp.) and finger millet (Eleusine coracana).   
 
While not necessarily strictly regarded as ‘mandate’ crops, several of the Centres 
have had significant programmes on various underused species going back 
many years. ICARDA, for example, undertakes genetic resources work as well as 
breeding and selection on grasspea (Lathyrus sativus); IITA manages a 
collection of Bambara groundnut (Vigna subterranea); and CIP has for many 
years had a programme on Andean roots and tubers involving 9 species: achira 
(Canna indica), ahipa (Pachyrhizus ahipa), arracacha (Arracacia xanthorrhiza), 
maca (Lepidium meyenii), mashua (Tropaeolum tuberosum), mauka (Mirabilis 
expansa), oca (Oxalis tuberosa), ulluco (Ullucus tuberosus) and yacón 
(Smallanthus sonchifolius).  ILRI, ICARDA and CIAT all have long standing 
programmes on forages, covering a very extensive range of species, many of 
which are wild and almost all of which could be regarded as underused.  
 
The World Agroforestry Centre, ICRAF, has since its inception carried out 
extensive research and development work on a wide range of species including, 
for example, the vegetable tree moringa (Moringa oleifera), the safou plum 
(Dacryodes edulis), the fruit trees Irvingia gabonensis, and Sclerocarya birrea, 
the edible oilseed 'Allanblackia tree', the medicinal African plum (Prunus 
africana), and many others.  
 
Perhaps the centre having the largest involvement in underused species is 
Bioversity International (previously IBPGR and IPGRI). It has had a wide-ranging 
programme since its establishment but work received a boost in the early 1990s 
with the initiation of a special project to give focus to the work on these species. 
Many other of Bioversity’s projects have also involved underused crops such as 
those on African leafy vegetable and tropical fruits. Bioversity has published  

 

14

  

  

  

some 26 monographs on underused crops7 (most in partnership with other 
institutions, including ICUC), as well as lists of germplasm descriptors for about 
20 underused species and a number of other publications, both on specific 
species and on more general topics including, in 2001, a specific ‘Strategic 
Action Plan on Neglected and Underutilized Species’ for the institute.  
 
While, as described above, certain Centres of the CGIAR have been involved in 
research on underused crops for many years, there has recently been a growing 
interest in them, reflected in and guided by the new system priorities as released 
in 2005 in the document: ‘System Priorities for CGIAR Research 2005–2015’. All 
of the five main priority areas described in the document offer opportunities for 
work on underused crops. These are: 
Priority area 1: Sustaining biodiversity for current and future generations 
Priority area 2: Producing more and better food at lower cost through genetic 

  improvements 

Priority area 3: Reducing rural poverty through agricultural diversification and 

Priority area 4: Promoting poverty alleviation and sustainable management of 

emerging opportunities for high-value commodities and products 

water land and forest resources 

Priority area 5: Improving policies and facilitate institutional innovation to support 

sustainable reduction of poverty and hunger 

 
Each of these priority areas comprises 4 more specific priorities and of these the 
following are perhaps the most relevant and have resulted in a number of 
important initiatives on underused species:  
Priority 1B:  Promoting conservation and characterization of under-utilized plant  

genetic resources  

Priority 2C:  Enhancing nutritional quality and safety  
Priority 2D:  Genetic enhancement of selected high-value species 
Priority 3A:  Increasing income from fruits and vegetables  
Priority 3D:  Promoting sustainable income generation from forests and trees 
Priority 4D:  Promoting sustainable agro-ecological intensification in low and high 

potential areas 

Priority 5A:  Improving science and technology policies and institutions 
Priority 5B:  Making international and domestic markets work for the poor 

                                            
7 Monographs include: Buckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentus), Chenopods (Chenopodium spp.), 
Hulled Wheats, Tef (Eragrostis tef),  Bambara Groundnut (Vigna subterranea), Grass pea 
(Lathyrus sativus), Lupin (Lupinus spp.), Coriander (Coriandrum sativum), Oregano (Origanum 
vulgare), Niger (Guizotia abyssinica), Andean roots and tubers: Ahipa, arracacha, maca and 
yacon, Chayote (Sechium edule), Mashua (Tropaeolum tuberosum), Yam Bean (Pachyrhizus 
spp.), Carob tree (Ceratonia siliqua), Physic nut (Jatropha curcas), Breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis), 
Mangosteen (Garcinia mangostana), Monkey Orange (Strychnos cocculoides), Ndjanssang 
(Ricinodendroni heudelotii), Pili nut (Canarium ovatum), Sago palm (Metroxylon sagu), Tres 
Especies de Zapote en América Tropical (Pouteria spp), Aibika/Bele (Abelmoschus manihot), 
Black nightshades (Solanum nigrum and related species), and Cat's whiskers (Cleome 
gynandra).  
 

 

15

 
This evolution in the CGIAR’s priorities and strategies has led to a situation 
where today a significant number of the Centres are involved in one way or 
another, directly or indirectly, with underused species. In addition to the more 
traditional CGIAR work on genetic resources, plant breeding and agronomy, 
activities now encompass such areas as crop diversification, domestication, 
income generation, processing, nutrition and health, marketing, and policy and 
institutional reform.  
 
The following gives a few examples of the work of some of the Centres on 
underused species, in order to show the range and diversity of activities currently 
being undertaken within the system. It does not aim to be comprehensive and 
significantly more work is being carried out than it has been possible to list here:   
 
1.  Bioversity 

International  remains,  arguably 

in 
underused  species  and 
it  currently  hosts  GFU.  A  new  Platform  for 
Agrobiodiversity Research has been launched, with significant implications for 
research  on  underused  crops,  and  a  new  System-wide  Plant  Genetic 
Resources Programme (SGRP) strategy is being developed that includes new 
and  under-utilized  species.  A  major 
international  collaborative  project 
supported  by  IFAD  works  in  Bolivia,  Burkina  Faso,  Ecuador,  Egypt,  India, 
Morocco, Peru and Yemen to:  
• 

increase the contributions of neglected and underutilised species (NUS) to 
improved livelihoods through enhancing the capacities of stakeholders in 
value-adding  technologies  and  best  practices  for  the  promotion  of  local 
biodiversity, together with more effective marketing of target species and 
products 
identify the contribution that key species can make to dietary diversity and 
to improved nutrition, particularly in children and expectant women.  

the  most  active  Centre 

• 

•  strengthen  the  contribution  of  NUS  to  sustainable  agricultural  production 
through  their  integration  into  an  increased  range  of  production  systems, 
ensuring their improved use and diversity maintenance in these systems 

•  develop  methodologies  and  approaches  for  the  management  of  tourism 
activities  by  local  communities  with  a  focus  on  safeguarding  their  own 
cultural identity and their genetic resource assets through NUS 

•  support the development of multi-sectoral enabling policies at national and 
international  levels,  including  the  provision  of  relevant  data  to  policy 
makers,  and  to  strengthen  collaboration  among  institutions  working  on 
NUS.  

 
CIAT has initiated a Rural Agro-enterprise Development (RAeD) project that 
works across commodities and disciplines in a commodity chain perspective. 
Activities involve not only production but also process and marketing. CIAT is 
also working on various tropical fruits including; lulo or narajilla, (Solanum 
quitoensis), mora or Andean raspberry (Rubus glaucus) and avocado (Persea 
americana). The work promotes on-farm conservation and the evaluation and 

 

16

selection of superior clones and has links to the RAeD project. CIAT has also 
established an Information Centre of Tropical Fruits. 
 
CIFOR is involved indirectly with underused forest species in a number of its 
projects, although these are mostly designed to address more generic issues 
such as the sustainable use of forests and managing landscapes for sustainable 
livelihoods. A project on protecting and improving human well being through 
forests, for example, is conducting a series of case studies in India, Nepal, 
Cameroon, and Guinea, looking at markets for non-timber forest products and 
identifying methods and opportunities for sustainably producing them.  
 
CIP is continuing to work on Andean roots and tubers, primarily through it in situ 
and ex situ conservation activities and the selection of superior genotypes. It is 
also involved in activities on other Andean crops, for example quinoa 
(Chenopodium quinoa).  CIP also convenes a collaborative project entitled Urban 
Harvest that promotes urban and peri-urban agriculture and includes a number of 
research activities on underused species, especially vegetables. 
  
ICARDA, over recent years has become involved in conducting research on a 
wide variety of underused crops, especially through its Mega-projects on a) 
integrated gene management: conservation, improvement and sustainable use of 
agrobiodiversity in dry areas, and b) improvement, intensification and 
diversification of sustainable crop and livestock production systems in dry areas. 
Much of the research focuses on diversification and includes both production and 
marketing. Underused crops studied by ICARDA include: pomegranate (Punica 
granatum), pistachio (Pistacia vera), cactus pear (Opuntia spp.), sesame 
(Sesamum indicum), linseed (Linum usitatissimum), lupin (Lupinus spp.), and 
various medicinal and spice plants.  
 
ICRISAT, in addition to the work on minor millets mentioned earlier, has a 
number of other activities that involve underused species, for example in its 
project ‘Reducing Rural Poverty through Agricultural Diversification and 
Enhancing Opportunities for High-Value Commodities and Products’ and through 
the collaborative Desert Margins Project. Research and development work 
includes:  

•  Domestication of Acacia senegal 
•  Research and promotion of traditional vegetables. 
•  Promoting Roselle (Hibiscus sabdifara.) as a cash crop for export 
•  Research and promotion of forage millet varieties 
•  Production of watermelons on stored soil moisture 
•  Pomme du Sahel: introduction of the domesticated Ziziphus mauritiana 

from India 
Introduction of new species and varieties of various fruit trees 

• 

 
IFPRI is carrying out a number of policy-related activities that are relevant to 
underused species. One of the outputs foreseen of its sub-theme on Genetic 

 

17

Resource Policies for the Poor is the identification of market related means of 
promoting the sustainable management of crop genetic resources, including 
underused species.  Under its research theme on the Future of Smallholder 
Agriculture, IFPRI aims to improve the competitiveness of small farms through 
better links with markets, for example through contract farming, vertically 
integrated schemes, market information systems, commercial rules and laws, 
commodity exchanges, and producer and trader associations. 
 
IITA, in addition to its work on Bambara groundnut, yam and cowpea referred to 
earlier, is working on underused crops primarily through its projects on 
Agrobiodiversity and High-Value Products. The IITA genebank is processing for 
long-term storage and distribution approximately 200 accessions of 11 different 
underused species and aims, by 2009, to have characterized and be in a position 
to distribute 200 accessions of African yam bean (Sphenostylis stenocarpa). IITA 
also convenes the Sustainable Tree Crops Programme(STCP) that is looking, 
among other things, at how underused species can best be associated with 
perennial tree-crop systems. 
 
IWMI, in addition to hosting ICUC, is involved indirectly in underused crops 
through its work on alternative crops in irrigated systems.  
 
World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF) has been active in underused species since 
its establishment – indeed almost all the species with which it works have the 
potential to be grown on a larger scale. ICRAF has developed and maintains an 
on-line searchable agroforestry tree database that contains details of more than 
500 species and it manages a germplasm collection of approximately 1,800 
accessions. 
 
Non-CGIAR Institutions involved in underused species:   
There is a very large number of institutions outside the CGIAR that work, in one 
capacity or another, on underused species. The database of institutions and 
projects maintained by GFU provides a glimpse of some of the actors involved, 
but only a rather partial one. It is summarized in Annex 5 but is heavily biased 
towards Europe and the Anglophone developing world and is largely silent on the 
very large amount of work being done, for example, in North America, India and 
China and in many university departments throughout the world. While a 
complete listing would be interesting in order to gauge where most efforts lie – 
and hence what services are most needed - and where significant gaps exist, this 
is clearly beyond the scope of this report. An attempt is made here only to briefly 
describe the major types of institutions involved and to identify a few of those that 
provide services of interest more generally and that go beyond the research and 
development of a just a single, or small group of species. 
 
While it is clearly difficult to fully categorize the wide variety of institutions 
involved with underused species, most fall into one of the following broad 
categories:  

 

18

 
• 

International and regional institutions and programmes come in a range of 
different guises, from CGIAR-like international research centres such as the 
World Vegetable Centre (AVRDC), headquartered in Taiwan and CATIE in 
Costa Rica, international foundations such as PROTA in the Netherlands and 
PROSEA in Indonesia, to special programmes of international agencies such 
FAO and the MOST Programme of UNESCO.  Such institutions and 
programmes, like those of the CGIAR, often provide services in addition to 
more narrowly focussed R&D, and are thus likely to be key partners for the 
new entity.  

 
•  National government-sponsored research and development institutions, of 

which there is a large number and variety. While many have programmes that 
are narrowly focussed on a few crops of national interest (a large number of 
NARS institutions come in this category), others, including several 
government-supported technical assistance institutions operate internationally 
(e.g. CIRAD, France and GTZ, Germany) and have a much wider range of 
expertise and projects. As such they are natural partners for the new entity.  

 
•  Universities collectively have perhaps the largest number of projects focussed 
on underused crops. These are often the result of a particular interest of one, 
or a few, professors or other staff. They can cover everything from a narrow 
focus on one or a few species to many, and from just one component of the 
value chain to a broad coverage of all aspects from the conservation of 
genetic resources and breeding to processing and marketing. A few 
universities have programmes that offer important international services (such 
as information or technical assistance) that go beyond a single or small group 
of crops, and it is these that are perhaps of special interest as key partners for 
the new entity. They include, for example: the New Crops Centre at the 
University of Purdue, USA; the Australian New Crops information service at 
the University of Queensland, Australia; the Agroforestry and Novel Crops 
Unit at James Cook University, Australia; the Laboratory of Tropical and 
Subtropical Agronomy and Ethnobotany at the University of Ghent; the Centre 
for Underutilised Crops at Southampton University, UK; the ILDIS 
Coordinating Centre at the University of Reading, UK; the International 
Initiative for Non-food Crops (IIN) at Imperial College, UK; and 
AlternativeCropsCanada.org at the University of Guelph, Canada.   

 
•  Botanical gardens and herbaria frequently carry out activities relevant to 

underused species and provide services of interest to others. For example, 
they may offer a valuable source of taxonomic and other information (such as 
Index Kewensis maintained by he Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew) or of seed, 
and if so are likely to be important partners for the new entity.  

 
•  NGOs come in many shapes and sizes, as seen in even the very partial listing 

given in Annex 6. They range from small, local organizations (including 

 

19

farmers and growers associations and the like), to international scientific 
societies such as the International Society of Horticultural Science (ISHS). 
While most tend to be somewhat narrowly focussed on a small number of 
crops and/or locations, others, such as ISHS, have a wide range of activities 
in many different countries and could be very important partners for the new 
entity.   

 
•  Private For-Profit organizations also come in a vast range of shapes and 

sizes and it is impossible to categorize them all here. However, they range 
from small seed merchants and processors to international agro-industrial 
giants and supermarket chains. Collectively they constitute a very important 
client group for the new entity and some may even become important 
partners in certain areas of the work (e.g. as leading members of consortia or 
as providers of information and knowledge).  

 
•  Donor institutions do not normally implement projects, although a few are very 

active in supporting and being involved in the projects they fund. The 
McKnight Foundation (USA), for example, supports and links a number of 
projects on underused species around the world and ACIAR supports a 
several projects on underused crops in Southeast Asia. The new entity should 
make special efforts to dialogue with and partner such institutions.  

 
•  Networks and Consortia, in addition to those for which the CGIAR provides 

coordination and leadership (such as the European ECP/GR programme and 
the Platform for Agrobiodiversity Research convened by Bioversity 
International), various networks and consortia have been established that are 
concerned in some way with underused crops and which could be important 
partners for the new entity. They may be national in scope (such as the All 
India Coordinated Research Project un Underutilized Crops) or international 
(such the Interactive European Network for Industrial Crops and their 
Applications, or the INBAR-led GFAR Partnership Programme on Non-timber 
Forest Products for Livelihood Development).  One such consortium that 
should be considered a key partner for the new entity is the Global 
Horticultural Initiative, set up under the auspices of the World Vegetable 
Centre (AVRDC), CIRAD and ISHS.  

 
In conclusion, while the new entity clearly needs to forge strong partnerships with 
the CGIAR, there are clearly many other institutions with which it should also 
seek to partner in order to reduce unnecessary competition and to build on the 
many possible complementarities and synergies. In the first instance, it might be 
most useful to identify and seek to form alliances with all those that offer 
important information services relating to the needs of researchers and others 
involved with underused crops.    
 
 
5) Need for, mission and objectives of the new entity: 

 

20

 
Given the large number of individuals and institutions active in research and 
development of underused plant species, the question arises as to a) whether or 
not an additional entity is needed and b) if so, what should be its mission and 
objectives?  
 
With respect to the first question, all respondents to the questionnaire, without 
exception, recognized that there was an important role to be played by the 
proposed new entity, although differences inevitably existed as to what they felt 
should be its primary objectives and how it should be structured and organized. 
ICUC, and more recently GFU were both created to play a role for which there 
was a recognised and widely felt need, especially among developing country 
research and development institutions – a need that was clearly demonstrated 
through the priority given by the Global Forum for Agricultural Research (GFAR) 
to the creation of GFU. Since their creation it has continued to be abundantly 
evident, not least from the extensive calls made on the services of both 
institutions, that they do indeed fill an important niche and one that is likely to 
continue to exist for the foreseeable future. The provision of a user-friendly one-
stop-shop for information and knowledge, technical backstopping, the facilitation 
of capacity building and the brokering of partnerships and consortia are all areas 
that would be greatly missed if GFU and ICUC no longer existed.   
 
Question 5 of the questionnaire asked respondents to indicate what they believed 
should be the main objectives of the new entity. At the highest level, there 
appears to be broad agreement for a mission statement that would encompass 
the following: to enhance the role of underused crops in improving the 
livelihoods and wellbeing of the world’s poorest people, in sustaining 
human cultures and in achieving a better stewardship of the environment.  
  
It should be noted that such a mission statement would be broadly in line with 
those of both ICUC8 and GFU9.  
 

                                            
8 ICUC’s Mission: To promote the use of underutilised crops for the benefit of humankind and the 
environment 
ICUC’s Goal: Reduced poverty and suffering through the improvement and promotion of 
underutilized crops for food, medicines, fodder and industrial needs and for environmental 
protection 
9 GFU’s Mission: Promote and facilitate the sustainable deployment of underutilized plant species 
to increase food security and alleviate poverty among the rural and urban poor. 
GFU’s Objective: Support and strengthen organizations and networks working on different 
aspects of underutilized species through:  
•  providing improved access to information and financial resources 
• 
•  giving advice to policy makers on how to create an enabling policy environment for the 

increasing public awareness on the role of underutilized species for improving livelihoods 

deployment of underutilized species 

 

 

21

Almost all the ‘lower-order’ objectives listed by respondents are subsidiary to 
such a broad mission statement and tended to relate more to the new entity’s 
thematic focus and/or modus operandi, the subject of the following sections.  
 
 
6) Programme focus:  
 
The major programmatic focus of the new entity was explored in question 6 of the 
questionnaire. A series of possible activities were presented, based broadly on 
the range of activities currently covered by ICUC and GFU. Respondents were 
requested to rate these in terms of their importance for the new entity and were 
invited to add any comments they felt were relevant and to suggest additional 
areas that should be covered. A summary of the numerical ratings is provided in 
Annex 4. In the sections that follow, each topic is presented and analysed 
separately and an overall summary is provided at the end.  
 
a) Providing an information clearinghouse/global knowledge management 
service:   
The highest rating of all was given to the new entity playing a key role in 
information management, with almost 90% or all respondents indicating that such 
a function was either essential or highly desirable. Of the 35 responses only two 
felt that such a function was not very important or unimportant, the latter 
commenting: “Why a global (information) management service when the focus is 
on local values and practices associated with underutilized crops?”. Commenting 
on the importance of providing information and communication services, one 
respondent noted that there is “more readily available information on African 
plants in the north than in Africa itself.” Several respondents commented on the 
current service provided by GFU through its web portal, indicating that it is well 
recognized and appreciated.  
 
A range of different approaches to information management and dissemination 
were advocated including:  

•  developing and maintaining on-line primary databases covering as wide a 

range of underused crop species as possible, as well as on other key 
topics (however, see below);  

•  concentrating on the provision of “meta knowledge”, i.e. providing a guide 
and gateway to databases and information sources maintained by others;  

•  providing synthesized information and analyses, packaged and 

disseminated in a form suitable for  particular target audiences – including 
in local languages;  

•  working with others to extend and strengthen the coverage of underused 
crops within their own information services, e.g. FAO’s World Information 
and Early Warning System (WIEWS);  Bioversity’s germplasm collection 
directory; Purdue University’s NewCrop website; the information service of 
the new International Initiative for Non-Food Crops at Imperial College; 

 

22

and the new information service being developed by the Global 
Horticultural Initiative;  

•  providing an on-line facility for discussion and the exchange of information 
and ideas; not just a passive service but the promotion of on-line meetings 
and a venue where various stakeholders can build alliances, discuss 
ideas, plan activities, etc. (Efforts by GFU and ICUC to launch an initiative 
along these lines under the umbrella of the International Society of 
Horticultural Science were commended).  

 
A number of specific topics were mentioned that respondents felt should be given 
particular attention within the context of the information and communication 
services to be provided by the new entity. These included:  
 

•  providing access to information on a wide range of different underused 

crops, including their nutritional value, potential uses, varietal 
characteristics, environmental requirements, cultivation methods, 
processing methods, etc.;  

•  providing a gateway to accession-level crop databases in conjunction with 

the CGIAR’s Systemwide Information Network on Genetic Resources 
(SINGER) or other accession level information system; 
information on research and development;  

• 
•  providing access to information on local and indigenous knowledge 

concerning underused crops. As such knowledge is often only to be found 
in local languages, there is a particular need for access to it in English 
and/or other major languages; 

• 

• 

•  providing information on policy and regulatory issues including analytical 

policy briefs; 
information on potential sources of funding and a guide to accessing such 
sources;  
information on institutions involved in underused species and experts who 
would be willing to make their expertise available; 
information on opportunities for education and training; 

• 
•  market information, including the results of previous market research (see 

also questions d. and e. below); 
scientific publications. There was a suggestion that the new entity should 
publish, perhaps jointly with one or more other institutions, a technical 
newsletter or even an on-line refereed scientific journal on underused 
crops; 
language was identified as an issue, especially for farmers, local NGOs, 
traders etc. One way to address this would be for the new entity to foster 
the development of local/national information sources. 

• 

• 

 

Respondents were asked to identify the key target audiences for the proposed 
information and communication services. All main stakeholder groups were 
mentioned including:  

•  Researchers (in national, regional and international institutions)  

 

23

•  Research mangers 
•  Extension agents 
•  Policy makers and national funding agencies 
•  Bilateral and multilateral donors and staff in development assistance 

organizations 

•  Farmers  
•  Members of growers associations, cooperatives etc.   
•  Grassroots/local and international Civil Society Organizations 
•  Agro-industry: processors and product developers 
•  Marketers, traders and buyers for supermarkets etc. 

 
Conclusions: there is a strong consensus that the provision of information and 
communication services should be among the key activities of the new entity. 
This should build upon the current initiatives of GFU and ICUC and the services 
should be widely publicized. It is proposed that a major focus would be on acting 
as a knowledge broker, or clearinghouse at the meta-level, providing a one-stop-
shop to assist stakeholders in their search for reliable information on the topics 
they need.  
 
In addition to facilitating access to information held by others, the new entity 
should also be pro-active in analysing and synthesising data and in disseminating 
the results in formats designed to meet the needs of clearly identified target 
audiences.  
 
The new entity should also aim to promote two-way communications: the 
exchange of data, information and ideas, a forum for building partnerships and 
alliances, etc. 
 
A fourth area might be in promoting the development of local information 
services, especially in local languages 
 
It is strongly suggested that prior to making any major additions or changes to the 
information and communication services already provided by GRU and ICUC, 
and in particular before considering the development of any new primary 
databases, an in-depth study/survey should be carried out of stakeholder 
information needs as well as of other already existing, readily accessible 
information sources that might, with or without modification or strengthening, 
serve to meet such needs.   
 
b) Undertaking hands-on research and development activities:  
Of all the activities listed in the questionnaire, respondents appeared most 
divided on the question of whether or not the new entity should be active in 
hands-on research and development. While 30% said that they felt it was 
essential or highly desirable that the new entity should take on such a role, 45% 
said it was not very, or not at all important.  
 

 

24

Comments on this question included:  

•  Underutilised crops are under-researched crops.  
•  Research should be carried out with / through organizations located in 

the relevant regions. 

•  Creating a new research Centre rather than promoting a platform or 

network would contradict present trends resulting from the 2005 Paris 
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness. 

•  Research should be done by national entities, possibly with support 

and guidance from the new entity.   
Implementation of pilot projects (if successful) would be an incentive to 
others engaging in similar activities. 

• 

•  This would probably go beyond the capacity of even a joint unit. 
•  Research and development should be carried out by units that are 

already working on the species concerned. The new entity should try to 
raise funds and promote collaboration among all those working on the 
species. 
It is impractical for the new entity to be established as a research 
institute given the large number of potential species (6-7,000). It is 
more important to synthesise research results achieved by others and 
make this available to potential users.  

•  How to prioritise the huge number of species? This should be done at 

• 

the national level. 

•  The entity should seek to stimulate research and development work 

but should only be involved if there is wide general significance of any 
results. 
It is extremely important that the entity undertake research to fill in 
gaps in knowledge. 

• 

•  Species are underused because markets are lacking altogether or are 

not available to sectors of the agricultural community. Models for the 
adoption of new species with a view to income generation (at regional 
or national level) might be valuable. 

•  New models are particularly valuable, but lessons from previous 

successes (e.g. kiwis, the many new citrus species available, ugly fruit, 
the many new fruits available in Brazil) must also be worth having 
documented. 

•  Plenty of entities are out there who are in a better position to carry out 

hands-on research. 

•  Conducting active, hands-on research can help give credibility, but by 
doing so the new entity would risk compromising its role as a neutral, 
all-encompassing advocacy body.  

•  There is no end to the amount of research that can be done, most of it 

will be somewhat location specific. The center may participate in the 
occasional study to show it is knowledgeable, and to keep itself up to 
date. 

 

25

•  Hands-on research and development should be promoted but carried 

out by others, including the CGIAR at the international level and 
national research agencies and universities at the national level.  The 
new entity need not carry out its own research; indeed this might even 
be seen as counter-productive. 

•  The entity should foster formally designed comparative trials and 

nurseries of non-invasive underused species. 

•  Advocacy that does not stand on some sort of research basis is likely 

to sound hollow. 

•  There are enough labs/programmes/universities where such work can 

be done and contracted. They need promoting and fostering.  

 
While the above set of comments reflects a wide diversity of opinion, this is at 
least in part due to different interpretations of the question; it was not about the 
importance of research per se, but the role, if any of the new entity in hands-on 
primary research.  While all doubtless agree that research and development are 
critically important, only a small minority actually saw hands-on research and 
development as a major function of the new entity. There seems to be a clear 
majority view that the new entity should predominantly play a catalytic, facilitating 
and supportive role, while a few respondents felt that it should also maintain a 
small hands-on research function as well, mainly for reasons of credibility and 
keeping up-to-date. Some explicitly acknowledged that such a role, if undertaken, 
could be based on the analysis of secondary data rather than on the generation 
and analysis of primary research data.   
 
Conclusions: it is suggested that the new entity should not itself have a major 
hands-on research and development function. It should, however, act primarily to 
catalyse, backstop and add value to the efforts of others. It should be active in 
areas such as helping to build R&D consortia and networks, backstop R&D 
efforts through its information and communication services, be active in helping 
to publicize the results of research and possibly help facilitate the process of 
setting international research priorities and strategies. To the extent that staff of 
the new entity are actively involved in any research, this might best be carried out 
through the analysis of secondary data and/or through supervising interns, 
Associate Experts, higher degree students or the like. Policy research and 
analysis lends itself to such an approach (see following section). 
 
c) Policy analysis and advocating for policy change: 
There was a broad consensus that a change in policy, at all levels, could help 
provide a more favourable environment for the production, processing, marketing 
and consumption of underused species. A large majority felt that the new entity 
should be active in the policy arena through carrying out appropriate analyses 
and, where necessary, advocating for change. 74% of respondents indicated that 
they thought that such activities were essential or highly desirable and only one 
felt that it was not at all important, stating: “ Promoting underutilized species 
cannot be a goal by itself. If the case can be made that (some) underutilized 

 

26

species have a lot to offer as poverty alleviation tools or towards sustainable 
agriculture, the center should make the effort to integrate them in such 
programs.”   
 
Comments and suggestions relating to policy as a topic for the new entity 
included: 

•  Some reservations because policy analysis / change requires in-depth 

knowledge and being immersed in national / regional fora / bodies, 
which is only feasible for individuals / organizations located in the 
respective countries / regions – thus “advocating for policy change” yes 
– conducting (directly) “policy analysis” no. 

•  Policy analysis – Yes. Advocacy – this is less likely to be effective 

except at a local level. 

•  Sound technical and scientific data supporting the cause for higher 

attention and investment in underutilized species is crucial. 

•  Advocacy – funding is scarce because of lack of interest/understanding 

of the potential of underutilized species amongst policy and decision 
makers 

•  Easier said than done. Putting up some form of guidelines on 

prioritization of species and activities, strategies for conservation etc. 
may be a more practical and achievable objective. 

•  The preparation of, and advice on policy would be a very important 

contribution 

• 

• 

•  This may well be a particular niche that only the new entity would be 

adequately equipped to fulfil. 
It would be very relevant to address market failure issues by doing 
global policy analysis-related research on the conservation and 
productive utilization of underutilized species. Such activity would 
involve advocacy to bring global attention to the research results.  
I’m tempted to say that the role should be limited to presenting and 
analyzing policy options, but I do like the idea of a more advocacy role, 
for all its potential political difficulties. Would be great if the new entity 
could behave more like an NGO in some ways, but that may be 
dreaming..... 

•  This is one of the most important areas and one where large-scale 
changes might be possible. But policy analysis needs to be built on 
solid data and these don’t sufficiently exist at present. However, if this 
entity is not tasked to carry out primary research then an “intelligent” 
way of funding such targeted research must be found.  

•  Absence of enabling and focussed policies from governments has led 
to the current state of affairs in the sector. In order to bring awareness 
and positive change, analysis of the existing policies and advocacy for 
change based on research findings should be aimed at. 

•  Policy is a major constraint, including trade policy, economic 

incentives, subsidies, and so fourth.  This is a serious pressure point. 

 

27

•  Focus on policy change by the new entity should be at the regional / 
international level. Local partners should be the ones to focus at the 
national level. 
It would not be sensible to cover in-house the needs for specialist skills 
for legal issues, IPR and trade barriers. The work could possibly be 
farmed out to specialized centres under close direction of the new 
entity. 

• 

•  This is necessary to promote the strategy of Think Locally and Act 

Locally 

  
Conclusions: there is a strong case to be made for the new entity being active in 
the policy arena. This could be through direct policy analysis and the preparation 
of policy briefs by staff of the new entity and/or through contracting or partnership 
arrangements with specialists in the areas concerned. The major focus of the 
entity’s own research and advocacy should probably be at the regional and 
international levels, while at the same time offering advice and assistance to 
partners active at the local and national levels.  
 
d) Providing links to market research and intelligence organizations and systems: 
Most respondents saw marketing as of critical importance and a key to many, if 
not most efforts to expand the use of underused species. While it is clearly not 
feasible for a small organization to take on a major role in providing market 
research and intelligence services, the question was asked whether or not the 
new entity should help provide links to organizations that do provide such 
services. 73% of respondents indicated that they felt this was an essential or 
highly desirable activity for the new entity while only 12% felt that it was not very, 
or not at all important.  
 
Comments on this question included:  

 

•  Key activity! If we wish to reverse the trend described in the first 

paragraph introducing this questionnaire, we have to “fight fire with 
fire”.  If the market demand isn’t there, underused plant species will 
continue to be underused. Creating market demand is enormously 
complicated and requires specialist partners – hence the emphasis on 
‘links’ to these organizations is the correct focus. 

•  This will require specific staffing 
•  This seems the kind of work for which the new entity could have a 

comparative advantage compared to most other entities that deal with 
specific aspects of neglected and underused species.  

•  This might involve the entity in focussing on specific crops and should 
only be undertaken where there are likely to be general experiences of 
value to the wider NUS community. 

•  This is important, but may not be overly difficult, i.e. it can be achieved 

fairly easily by maintaining a well-sourced database. 

 

28

• 

It is important to provide marketing linkages. It would be appropriate for 
the new entity to create a portal where updated information could be 
accessed and posted by those working in the sector. 
Inclusion in market is critical for these species. 

• 
•  This could in fact be a subject of the information and knowledge 

management services. 

•  A core activity. 
• 

If the underutilized crop has commercial value, then the private sector 
will definitely pick up this investment opportunity. We do not need to 
spend scarce resources to help the poor to market their products. Most 
likely the poor don’t have the marketing skill and resources to sustain 
the products in the market. 

•  Cooperate with development partners that have marketing experience. 
In the first instance, NGOs, where they exist, are useful stakeholders. 
• 

 
A discussion and conclusions regarding the possible role of the new entity in the 
whole are of marketing is provided at the end of the following section. 
 
e) Promoting market-oriented action and the concept of value-chains  
In addition to the possibility of providing links to sources of market information, 
the question was asked as to whether or not the new entity should be active in 
promoting market-oriented (demand driven) action, including promoting the 
concept of value-chains (or commodity chains) when conceiving, planning and 
executing projects designed to promote a greater use of underused crops.  While 
the question may not have been fully understood by all, there was nevertheless a 
clear majority in favour, with 2/3rds of respondents saying such activities were 
essential or highly desirable.   
 
Comments on this question included: 

•  Markets and value chains are an essential basis for promotion and 

• 

expansion of underused crops. 
I give it less priority than the previous point because I fear that the new 
institution will want to take on part of this role itself (e.g. developing 
value chains), which will not work.  Promoting the concept of value 
chains, yes. 

• 

•  Should perhaps seek to build alliances with other organizations to do 

this. 
I am not so sure that this approach would help the farmers much; it 
seems less practical than the previous point (d). 

•  This is important to providing the required conceptual framework for 
neglected and underused species. The activities undertaken should 
provide general lessons. 

•  Yes, ok, in the sense of providing an information platform on which 

value chains can be built, as appropriate. 

•  Essential to expanding the use of underutilised crops. 

 

29

•  To be implemented in a general way so that it benefits a range of 

underutilized species. 

•  One of the most important activities, but again something that will ‘fall 

into place’ if appropriate data collection (whether through primary 
research or synthesis) has been carried out. If the question is whether 
market research (in whichever form) should be a priority, then I would 
give it a clear 1. 

•  Beware that commercialization can be harmful, but if locally, yes. 
•  Should be addressed mainly through networks that understand local 

barriers and options for their removal. 

 

Conclusions: almost by definition, underused crops tend to be those for which 
there is a limited market. This can result from insufficient awareness of the 
product, poor product quality, an inability to supply the market with the quality or 
quantity of produce required and/or at the time needed, the existence of more 
economic and/or higher quality alternative products, insufficient marketable 
surpluses, excessive transport distances, lack of adequate transport 
infrastructure, excessive exploitation by middle men, overly stringent food safety 
regulations, etc. Addressing challenges such as these is essential to the success 
of attempts to increase the use of underused crops. The new entity should 
consider employing at least one senior staff member with expertise in this area. 
 
The new entity clearly cannot offer comprehensive market intelligence or market 
research services – the scale of the task required being way beyond what might 
be possible for a relatively small international institution. However, in order to 
promote a better understanding of the importance of markets and how they 
operate, and to provide advice and backstopping on how to influence them, how 
to maximize marketing opportunities and how to access and use them, the new 
entity might consider, inter alia: 

•  maintaining a database – and/or links to existing databases – of 

marketing expertise, both of individuals and institutions 

•  promoting the carrying out of case studies to determine best practices 

in a range of different situations  

•  preparing and disseminating guidelines and examples of best practice. 
•  promoting the creation of consortia that link producers with processors 

and local or international markets e.g. through  establishing suitable 
electronic or other fora where producers, processors, traders, etc. can 
make contact and develop and exchange ideas  

•  promoting the concept of value chains (production-to-consumption 

chains) through the entity’s information and communication services  
training – capacity building is key and the new entity could develop 
training materials that emphasize such areas as the concept of value 
chains, entrepreneurship, processing, storage, marketing, packaging, 
labelling, quality control, meeting regulatory requirements etc.  

• 

 

30

•  providing know-how on how and where to access local and 

international market information and, if feasible, providing appropriate 
links to relevant information sources 

 
f) Fostering the development of a broad-based underused species community at 
the national and international levels: 
All too often people with an interest in underused crops are isolated from each 
other, for example a farmer or university researcher with an interest in a 
particular species may not have any connection with people having knowledge or 
skills in the areas of processing or marketing. The question was thus raised as to 
whether the new entity should actively promote the development of communities 
of practice involving individuals and institutions interested in underused crops at 
either or both the national or international levels. A majority (70%) of respondents 
felt it was essential or highly desirable for the new entity to take on such a role.  
 
Comments on this question included:  

•  A community of practice is required that includes growers, consumers, 

traders and researchers across species and commodity chains 

•  Who else is filling this role, if anyone? 
•  A critical mass of stakeholders will generate desired momentum to 

spark more work. 

priority activities. 

•  This is possibly one of the preconditions to carry out some of the high-

•  Community of practice? Sure, again that just comes down to better 

information and better information flows. 
Important activity in support of the advocacy role of the new entity. 

• 
•  An activity that is necessary but cannot in itself be the raison d’etre of 

this new entity. If the entity has credibility through its outputs it can play 
a leadership role. ICUC has started through recent activities within the 
International Society for Horticultural Science. Not sure how much 
influence the entity can have at national level. 
•  Yes, this is very important, for three reasons: 

o 
It may be difficult to find the funding and the critical mass for 
working as an old fashioned international center 
o  The idea of such a community is much more in line with the 

current times, with the concept of devolution, networks, 
developing national capacity etc. 
It is probably the only way to accommodate the large range 
of different species and issues in this field  

o 

•  The new entity need not carry out its own research to be able to 

develop such a broad-based community.  Rather, this can be done 
through promoting research, developing policy, providing information, 
holding meetings (especially as part of other meetings, such as those 
organised by FAO or under some of the international Conventions). 

•  Engage also movements such as Via Campesina. 

 

31

•  Rather than moving from country to country to foster such development 

at the national level (that would take too much energy and make the 
task almost impossible), the new entity should promote processes and 
mechanisms at the international level (e.g. using UN fora) to influence 
governments to embed NUS in their R&D efforts. 

•  Too fluffy to be attractive when expressed in this way. 
•  The development of a broad-based underused species community at 

the national level is important in order to promote national identity 
through national values, culture and practices. 

•  Work on increasing awareness then this will follow. 
•  The past global newsletter of ICUC-UK and FAO seemed to 

accomplish this very well. It’s a cheap and effective way of doing it. 

 
Conclusions: promoting and backstopping partnerships, networks or consortia 
are clearly important functions for the new entity (see i below). However, in 
general these are probably most effective when fairly narrowly focussed on 
shared objectives, outputs and outcomes such as the development and 
marketing of a single species or product. Fostering the development of broadly-
based communities of practice, having interests across a wide range of 
disciplines, regions, species and products, could be both more difficult or 
expensive to achieve and is likely to have less impact, especially when aimed at 
the international level. Three areas suggest themselves as worthy of 
consideration by the new entity: a) the creation of appropriate web-based 
services aimed at creating an international community of stakeholders (such as 
setting up on-line discussion fora etc.), b) the publication of a newsletter having 
this as one of its objectives, and/or c) facilitating the creation of appropriate 
communities of practice and support systems at the national level (for example, 
promoting the concept of national underused crops support units).  
 
g) Increasing awareness among targeted audiences and the general public of the 
importance and potential of neglected and underused species;  
A lack of awareness among consumers, farmers, traders, processors, policy-
makers, donors and others has often been cited as a – or even the - major barrier 
to a greater use of underused species. When questioned on this, 53% of 
respondents said that increasing awareness among targeted audiences and the 
general public was an essential activity for the new entity and a further 24% felt it 
was highly desirable. 
 
Comments on this question included: 

•  The main target groups should be formal education (schools through to 
universities), end-users (actual and potential growers and consumers) 
and policy-makers (sponsors and governments). 

•  Working with others to create market demand yes, but more Natural 
History Channel Documentaries are not going to change the situation 
in the short-medium term. 

 

32

• 

I think this could be a role provided that the purpose in doing so is 
clear. General dissemination etc. is expensive – the question is 
inevitably, what do the target audiences want to know? – or is this 
more about social marketing and improving market pull? 

•  Should be more aimed at targeted audiences than the general public 
•  This activity is seen as a key one in order to create the preconditions 

•  The important discussion for the entity may be where to focus 

for meaningful interventions. 

awareness-raising work. 

•  The general public is better targeted by national-level efforts carried 

out by partners at that level. An international entity such as this is 
better off targeting researchers, policy-makers, the development 
community etc. 
Increased awareness of the role of underutilized species in livelihood 
strategies, farming systems, environmental services etc., is a pre-
condition for increased investments in underutilized species. 

• 

•  This should be part of the core work of the new entity - to focus mostly 
at the international level. I would recommend initiatives by professional 
PA experts to help NARS on mounting campaigns at the national level. 
•  Public awareness is important to get the programme funded and keep 

it funded. 

•  A higher rating would be given to promoting awareness among donors! 

 
Conclusions: while there was clearly very strong support for the new entity being 
involved in public awareness, there was some divergence of views regarding the 
nature of such activities and who should be the primary target audiences.  The 
question needs to be asked regarding the value of raising awareness of 
underused crops in general (‘there are a lot of species out there that have the 
potential, with a little R&D, to make an important impact on poverty, livelihoods, 
food security, health, the environment, etc.”) compared to raising awareness of 
specific opportunities, commodities, etc. The former is probably a key 
background message (ideally backed by specific case studies) for donors, 
national and international policy-makers, etc., while the latter may be more 
relevant for helping to galvanize action among farmers, researchers, traders, 
processors and the like. Awareness-raising targeted at donors and key policy- 
and decision-makers, especially at the international level, would seem to be a 
legitimate, and important activity for the new entity. More specific awareness of 
particular crops or products, and opportunities for expanding their production and 
use, is probably best left to actors or consortia active in field or commodity 
concerned, often, but not exclusively at the national level. However, the new 
entity might be in a position to provide advice and other assistance to such 
efforts.  
 
h) Capacity-building, education and training: 

 

33

When answering the question of whether the new entity should be involved in 
capacity-building, education and training, 66% of respondents said they thought 
this was essential or highly desirably.  
 
Comments included:  

•  Start by creating a database of what is presently offered around the 
world; target education and training on the capacity needed to create 
demand for, and relevant information about the use of these species. 
•  The inevitable question – capacity to do what, where and how will that 

capacity be sustained? Creating and sustaining institutions and 
supporting education programmes are expensive and long-term work, 
and to do this systematically will probably be beyond the resources of 
the new organisation. On the job and skills training is probably within 
both the resources and necessary mandate.  
I do not think that the new entity will ever be able to provide “hands-on” 
training etc., it should provide the tools and products that the specialist 
trainers, educators and capacity builders can use in their jobs. 
It might be better for the entity to stimulate development by others of 
capacity building activities. However, staff should be available to 
undertake capacity building work where practicable. 

• 

• 

•  The new entity should work with partners to strengthen the NUS 

component of the courses they offer (as was done in the case of GFU’s 
input to the joint Bioversity/Wageningen International/GFU/course on 
Promoting Agrobiodiversity Use: Markets and Chains).  

•  The new entity should be active in sponsoring PhD thesis research. It 
would be in a very good position to help identify research needs and to 
work with Bioversity, and/or other research institutions, to facilitate 
linkages between them and formal education establishments for 
generating new knowledge. 
I don’t think the new entity should itself necessarily provide training, 
any more than carry out hands-on research. But it could publicize 
training opportunities, provide the occasional bursary, try to link up 
supply with demand, influence curricula etc. 
ICUC has already found that this is an effective way to promote 
underused crops. 

• 

• 

•  The problem here is defining the scope of work on what could be an 

essentially endless task. The new entity might better serve its 
objectives by promoting such activities rather than carrying them out 
itself.  This could include preparation of appropriate capacity building, 
education and training materials. 
Important in relation to techniques, but not individual species. 

• 
•  When promoting national values, culture and practices is part of the 

national education system, then it would be easy to promote the 
conservation and utilization of underutilized crops that are associated 
with such values and practices. 

 

34

•  Extremely important, but in the context of networking, to build critical 
mass on a high priority species. Collaborators should be involved in 
defining the type of training. 

 
Conclusions: given the huge size and complexity of the task, there is a clear 
consensus that the new entity should not aim to be a primary provider of 
education or training. However, there is a very real sense, as pointed out by one 
respondent, that most – if not all – of the activities of the new entity would, in one 
way or another, contribute to building capacity.  
 
More specifically, it is suggested that the new entity should be active in 
developing and disseminating appropriate training materials and in helping to 
provide access to materials developed by others. It should be well positioned to 
influence curricula and to provide information on available education and training 
opportunities. Although it is unlikely to be in a position to offer scholarships or 
bursaries, it could assist in raising funds for this through its contacts with donors 
and in the context of specific projects. There may well be opportunities for higher 
degree students to conduct their thesis research in association with the new 
entity, and staff could, to a limited extent, be encouraged to supervise or co-
supervise such students. They might also give specific lectures on courses, or 
occasionally even run whole course modules. The new entity might also give 
consideration to promoting and facilitating exchange visits among scientists, 
farmers and/or others. 
 
With respect to target audiences, topics and methods, the list of possibilities is 
clearly very extensive and more detailed study and analysis is required before 
the new entity can set, and have confidence in its priorities. However, for the 
record, the following were specifically mentioned by various respondents as 
being important areas for the new entity: training of entrepreneurs; a special 
focus on processing, storage, marketing, packaging, labelling, quality control and 
meeting regulatory requirements; and the concept of value chains and how to 
develop and manage them. 
 
i) Promoting partnerships, convening consortia, backstopping networks etc.   
On average, this was regarded as the second most important activity for the new 
entity after its information function, with 83% of respondents rating it as essential 
or highly desirable.   
 
Comments included: 

•  Pump-priming only to establish consortia and networks that should 

then be self-sustaining. 

•  The new entity will need to work through partnerships, specifically 

those who have specific and complementary assets and resources. 
Backstopping rather than funding networks will be useful. 

 

35

•  This is the kind of work that would allow a much bigger “impact factor” 
then for instance training people. It is also a means to be strategic and 
to create new alliances that would not get established without help. 
•  Can the organization really hope to promote local consortia, beyond 

working on models? 

•  Essential. Indeed a core activity. 
•  Essential for achieving big impact of any activities being carried out by 

• 

stakeholders 
I would not see this as the main activity – to my mind there are too 
many non-operational networks in place and everyone loves to be a 
coordinator but nobody really likes to be coordinated by others. A 
support role can be played, syntheses ought to be made but I would 
think that this would not be the main role.  

•  This will be a very important part of getting a community of practice to 

work. 

•  The entity should aim at being the ‘information component’ in multi-

partnerships in rural development and should play a role in the 
coordinated biodiversity conservation efforts involving Bioversity, GEF, 
Global Crop Diversity Trust. 

 
Conclusions: while promoting partnerships, convening consortia, backstopping 
networks, etc. were seen as extremely import concepts and activities for the new 
entity, there was a divergence of opinion as how best it should be involved. Past 
experience with running networks, e.g. UTFANET have not always been entirely 
positive. There were strong voices to avoid getting involved in setting up and 
running networks or consortia at the national level – although the new entity 
might assist in such cases through providing guidelines, examples of best 
practice, etc.  A more appropriate role might be to promote and assist the 
creation and operation of regional and international consortia, and to participate 
in them (though rarely if ever lead them) primarily through the provision of 
relevant information and facilitating communications.  
  
j) Donor liaison and fundraising: 
57% of respondents considered that donor liaison and fundraising were essential 
activities of the new entity, with a further 23% rating it as highly desirable.  
 
Comments on this question included: 

•  Conventional sources of support, as for major crops, are lacking. 

Funds need to be raised through convincing foundations and other 
private sector agencies and local governments that underutilised crops 
are the future. 

•  Clearly, to survive, the new entity will need reliable and predictable 
funding – in this respect it will inevitably be in competition with other 
organisations – raising funds is time consuming and very demanding of 
senior staff. The ideal would be to raise largish grants from two or three 
sources, if they can be found, though this could render it vulnerable to 

 

36

a shift in donor staff or policies.  It should avoid fund-raising on behalf 
of others; partners should raise their own funds! The business plan 
might look at raising funding directly from the public – for example the 
‘Rare Breeds Survival Trust’ raises much of its income directly. 

•  This is possibly one of the key responsibilities of the entity, especially 

since the growers of NUS have no advocacy or “pressure” group 
anywhere. 

•  Extremely difficult to do as a general objective. Some will be necessary 

on its own behalf but it should not generally plan to do it for others. 

•  Fundraising and donor liaison should be done by the stakeholders for 

their specific purposes. The new entity should focus on sensitizing 
donors to the topic “underutilized species” and providing them with 
evidence of the importance of these crops (awareness creation). The 
entity can, however, provide stakeholders with information on funding 
opportunities 

• 

•  Absolutely necessary; neither GFU nor ICUC have done sufficiently on 

this - though they are trying! 
Issues of donor liaison are something that might better be 
accomplished by the CGIAR and the national entities.  At the national 
level, the ministries of agriculture should be promoted to do such work, 
and they are perhaps not best considered as donors. 

•  Essential – but not as an objective in itself. 
•  This is important to leverage the government support system. 
• 

 ICUC/GFU experience problems because they don’t have enough 
critical mass; PROTA has much more critical mass, but is experiencing 
funding problems because it focused too much on content generation 
and forgot to sell the programme to the donors.  

•  This is a vital point. Donors should be educated on the value of these 

crops and their importance for the wellbeing of poor people. 

•  Should be in the context of mobilizing support and action for specific 

projects/networks working on agreed target species and using 
standard methodologies. 

 
Conclusions: all inevitably agreed that good donor relations and fundraising to 
support its own programmatic and administrative needs are essential if the new 
entity is to thrive and be in a position to make a positive impact. Opinion was 
divided, however, over the extent to which it should be involved in fundraising for 
others. Respondents most closely associated with fundraising and donor 
agencies almost uniformly advised against taking on a responsibility for raising 
funds for others. It is suggested that the new entity follow this advice, while at the 
same time recognizing that it does have a significant role to play in raising 
awareness of the potential contribution of many underused species (see g above) 
among donors (bilateral, multi-lateral, foundations etc.) as well as with 
appropriate ministries in developing countries having a capacity to provide 
funding at the national level (Ministries of Agriculture, Science and Technology, 
Environment, Finance, Commerce etc.).  It should also consider making 

 

37

information available on the existence of specific funding sources and how to tap 
into them, through its information and communication services.  
 
k) Developing and promoting generic concepts, models and decision tools for 
research and development:  
In general there was less enthusiasm for this as a significant activity for the new 
entity than for many of the other possibilities presented. Only 59% of respondents 
felt that this was an essential or highly desirable activity. 
 
Comments on this question included:  

•  We neither have the time or luxury of researching individual crops ad 

hoc and without co-ordination. Priority species and activities need to be 
identified and set across crops and commodity chains. Models, new 
genetic and information technologies and decision tools need to be 
harnessed to accelerate progress and maximise impact. 

•  This should be covered already by Bioversity and others.  I am 

suspicious of this focus when a hardnosed business mentality should 
be the main approach to creating an opening for these species – I 
doubt that modelling will achieve that aim. 

•  For whom? Who is the customer and who will pay? 
•  As a facilitation unit, this would be a core activity for the new entity. 
•  Other organizations are doing this in partnership with national projects 
•  The new entity would be the appropriate place where these generic 

concepts and tools should be developed and disseminated to all 
stakeholders for adaptation and adoption. Other existing institutions 
have no mandate and interest to develop generic tools and models but 
focus on specific cases. 

•  Much of this is already covered by Bioversity. 
•  This is important but should be done principally by participating in 

projects/studies at the national level. 

•  This is consistent with encouraging others to do the work.  This is a 

way of contributing value to the development of the broad-based 
underused species community.  

•  This is also an important task, but probably will only be efficiently 

implemented after the launching of the organisation and the 
designation of one staff member to take care of this specific domain. 

 
Conclusions: there seems to be reasonable agreement on the importance of 
developing and promoting generic concepts, models and decision tools to 
support the development and promote the use of underused species. There is 
also reasonable agreement that this is an appropriate activity for an international 
entity. Opinion is divided as to the extent others are filling this need – especially 
Bioversity, although the Director of that institute himself stated: “such activity is 
central to the reason for supporting and maintaining [a new] entity. It could be 
done through commissioned research. The results can be shared in the 
information clearing house in point “a” above.”  It is suggested that the new entity 

 

38

should work closely with Bioversity and other relevant institutions to define a 
programme of work that would result in the creation and dissemination of 
appropriate generic concepts, models and decision tools. Much, or even all of the 
work might best be carried by other institutions, possibly with the new entity 
playing a facilitating role.  
 
 l) Promoting the establishment of priorities and strategies at the local, national 
and international level: 
Promoting wide agreement on priorities and strategies – creating a shared 
agenda - among key stakeholders is an important step in developing productive 
partnerships and fostering action. 66% of respondents addressing this question 
thought that this was an essential or highly desirable activity for the new entity.  
 
Comments included: 

•  As long as these are set at local/national levels. Integrating (agreeing 

on) these for more than one country will not be easy. 

• 

•  This type of work might be able to build on the experience of Bioversity 
and GCDT – but this might turn the entity into a consultancy-type body, 
which would put a huge strain on the organisation. 
I do not think that the new entity should get involved in the priority 
setting at the local or even national level. It possibly should influence 
the processes through the provision of information and advice, not by 
being directly involved. The same might apply to strategies but is more 
complex and thus, more difficult to judge. 

•  The most important elements might include establishing strategies at 
an international level and developing frameworks and methodologies 
that can be adopted and used for local and national level priority 
setting and strategy development. 
I like the idea followed at the moment by ICUC and GFU of setting the 
international (and to some extent regional) framework and then letting 
people run with that at the national level. 

•  Enough has been done - let’s do the work now on the strategy already 

• 

• 

developed by various organisations. 
I would put more importance to identifying the approaches by which 
countries/organizations can identify their priorities and strategies.  
•  The promotion aspect is the most attractive, building the local and 

national capacity to develop their own priorities and strategies, while 
perhaps taking a more hands-on approach at the international level. 
•  This work should form part of the mandate of ISNAR-at-IFPRI rather 
than special pleading for NUS within a NARS. Should arise out of a 
rationalised NARS process of strategy development and priority setting 
not as a one-off exercise.  

•  This is only important at the local and national levels. 
•  Should maintain a ‘watching brief’ on such strategies and be in a 

position to comment constructively, suggest changes and help 
development of strategies where needed. Sufficient global strategies 

 

39

exist without reinventing the wheel; they may need some fine-tuning 
and possible revision in a decade or so. 

 
Conclusions: shared priorities and strategies underlie successful partnerships, 
thus their existence is important to the overall success of the new entity. 
However, there is a strong argument to be made that such priorities and 
strategies are most useful for guiding action at the local and national levels where 
the new entity would have little advantage in taking a significant role beyond 
promoting their development, possibly providing guidelines and examples of best 
practice, and making available appropriate information. However, the new entity 
could take on a more proactive role for updating and for monitoring the 
implementation of the regional strategic frameworks for Asia and the Pacific, and 
Sub-Saharan Africa, developed by GFU and ICUC, and for promoting the 
development of similar frameworks for other regions.  
 
m) Developing baseline data and indicators for monitoring and evaluating 
progress in the expanding use of neglected and underused crops: 
Only about one quarter of respondents felt this was an essential activity for the 
new entity and only just over half felt this was either essential or highly desirable.  
 
Comments on this question included:  

•  Yes as long as data are credible and transparent – this is not a 

promotional tool. 

•  Success if achieved should be fairly obvious; do we need indicators 
(numbers in boxes) to show this?  Documenting successes and how 
they were achieved (e.g. conditions/actions that favoured success) 
would be an important contribution.  Systematization studies, carried 
out by multi-disciplinary teams, are a much better way to spend scarce 
resources than using them for a detailed monitoring and evaluation 
scheme; the former is much more likely to contribute to further positive 
change. 
 As a generic exercise I think this might have limited value and demand 
– however building in M and E performance measure in any activity 
undertaken is good practice and might help secure funding. However 
the traditional donor community might be more interested in livelihoods 
improved and poverty reduced, and the extent to which UUCs are the 
most effective way of achieving these goals. 

•  Possibly too big a task to conduct and also very resource demanding. 

• 

This kind of baseline data and indicator development for monitoring 
NUS is possibly a typical responsibility for FAO. The entity should 
advise FAO how best to go about this. 

•  A valuable contribution that might be undertaken with some relevant 

• 

international collaborators (FAO, Bioversity International). 
Important not only in English but also in other languages such as 
Spanish. 

 

40

• 

Indicators yes, not so sure about data. Developing data suggests going 
out and doing research, which I don’t think this entity should be doing, 
at least not hands-on. But collating existing data, identifying gaps etc., 
yes. 

•  Would be very valuable but probably a very demanding task that 

requires substantial resources. Needs involvement of other 
organizations such as CBD, FAO, Bioversity International. 

•  Shouldn’t this be part of any project? Definitely necessary but not in 

isolation. 

•  Only in so far as it is important for donor agencies. Make use of FAO 
and CGIAR data-collection and analytical services. Species-specific 
networks should organise their own crop surveys and publicise results. 

•  This is important to relate the conservation and use of neglected and 

underused crops to traditional values and practices and national 
identity. 

•  Will be more important later. 

 
Conclusions: as for any organization, it will be important for the new entity to be 
able to monitor its progress and assess its impact, both to help improve its own 
performance and to be able to demonstrate to its donors the wise use of the 
funds provided. This will inevitably involve establishing baselines, milestones, 
and indicators. The experience gained in setting up its own monitoring and 
evaluation system is likely to put it in a good position to help others, through the 
provision of guidelines and advice. Such advice and assistance is likely to be 
especially helpful at the level of individual crops or projects, where such 
monitoring and evaluation should become routine. Accepting that it will be 
extremely difficult to set up a system for monitoring and evaluating more general 
progress in the expanding use of neglected and underused crops, going beyond 
just an aggregation of data on individual crops, some attempt should probably be 
made to do this, ideally in collaboration with other institutions such as FAO, 
Bioversity International and other CGIAR Centres.  
  
n) Conducting or supporting research and compiling evidence to demonstrate the 
value of underused species: 
59% of respondents thought that it was essential or highly desirable that the new 
entity should conduct or support research, or at least compile evidence, 
specifically designed to demonstrate the value of underused species.  
 
Comments on this question included:  

• 

I think that this is ‘do able’ for a small organisation – but I think that 
focusing solely on UUCs rather than in comparison with the fully 
utilised crops might only have limited value.  However the opportunity 
to demonstrate that under certain conditions UUCs are superior could 
be very valuable. 

 

41

•  This gets a 4 because “supporting” was included in the question 

(otherwise it would have been a 5!).  I am not at all in favour of 
establishing a new research institute for this theme. 

•  We need sound technical and scientific data that makes a solid point 

on the nutritional, economic, environmental and income generation 
value of engaging in work with underutilized species. 

•  Possibly an activity that can be done opportunistically and on a case-

by-case basis. 

•  The entity may not be the best body to conduct research but could 
usefully be involved in compiling evidence. GFU and ICUC are in a 
unique position to strengthen and bring together research based on 
identified needs gathered from their extensive network of partners. 

•  Compiling evidence is an obvious role for the database 
• 

It is an important task but should not force the new entity to focus on a 
number of species. The activity could be carried out by several others 
with the new entity analyzing and summarizing the various findings 

•  Needs to be done by collaborators 
•  Absolutely necessary to underpin policy analysis and advocacy. This is 

obviously very important, because the organization must believe in 
itself. The key here is to show how underused species contribute to 
sustainable and equitable development. 

•  Evidence based output would be the best way to disseminate or 
replicate any action research undertaken with specific objectives. 

•  Not actually conducting research, but rather promoting research and 

compiling evidence.  The focus needs to be supporting the broad-
based underused species community. 

•  New entity to collate successful stories (and failures as well) to draw 

• 

general lessons and further knowledge on NUS 
It is more important to develop methodology to quantify values of UCs 
than to compile case studies and focus on benefits along the 
production-to-consumption supply chain. 

 
Conclusions: in answering this question, there was a clear consensus that the 
new entity should not itself be directly involved in primary research to 
demonstrate the value of underused species. However, it was also recognized 
that such data is necessary to underpin policy advocacy, awareness raising and 
to make a convincing case to donors for funding. It is thus suggested that the 
new entity promote the collection of such data, help compile and synthesise it, 
and carry out analyses to increase its value for advocacy and fundraising.    
 
o) Please add any additional activities you feel should be undertaken by the new 
entity: 
 
Very few suggestions were received for additional activities to be taken on by the 
new entity, with several respondents commenting that the potential list of 
activities provided in the questionnaire was already long enough! Of the few 

 

42

suggestions made, some had already been subsumed within items already 
addressed and others were clearly already the responsibility of other institutions.  
 
There were two main additional areas identified. The first was the suggestion to 
highlight processing – an area regarded as generally neglected. While many 
national and international institutions are heavily involved in genetic resources 
conservation and improvement and in crop production research and 
development, far fewer are active in the area of processing and the creation of 
new products. Furthermore, many of those that do work in this area have 
relatively weak links with the production research and development community. It 
is thus suggested that the new entity give special attention to this area, and in 
particular help to strengthen these links through its facilitation work, information 
and communication services and advocacy.   
 
The second area suggested for attention is the socio-economic environment of 
the research and development activities. Traditionally many underused crops are 
crops of the poor and marginalised and in order to maximise the impact of the 
work on their wellbeing, it is extremely important that it take full account of their 
social, cultural and economic context. Participatory research methods should be 
encouraged wherever appropriate, and due care paid to gender and human 
diversity issues. Recording and understanding local and indigenous knowledge 
about the crops and products is likely to be of critical importance in many 
situations – and attention must be paid to the issues of ownership of, and rights 
over the intellectual property embodied in such knowledge.   
 
Overall conclusions and suggestions on programmatic focus:  
The sections above have identified a series of important programmatic areas 
where the new entity would have a comparative advantage and could expect to 
make a significant impact. Overall it has a clear comparative advantage in 
undertaking activities in the international and regional arenas, while at the 
national and local levels it can generally best be of service through supporting 
and backstopping those who are better positioned to act at those levels. Given 
the large number of possible activities discussed, it might be helpful to indicate 
those that are considered essential for the new entity and those that should be 
taken on only if funding and other resources allow.  
 
It is thus suggested that the new entity give highest consideration to carrying out 
activities in the following areas: 
 

1)  Providing information and communication services, building upon the 

current activities of GFU and ICUC. A major focus would be on acting as a 
knowledge broker, or clearinghouse at the meta-level, providing a one-
stop-shop to assist stakeholders in their search for reliable information on 
the topics they need.  

 

 

43

2)  In addition to facilitating access to information held by others, the new 

entity should also be pro-active in analysing and synthesising data and in 
disseminating the results in formats designed to meet the needs of the 
target audiences.  

3)  The new entity should also aim to promote two-way communications: the 

exchange of data, information and ideas, creating fora for building 
partnerships and alliances, etc.  

 
4)  While it suggested that the new entity should not itself have a major 

hands-on research function, it should aim to catalyse, backstop and add 
value to the efforts of others. It should backstop research efforts through 
its information and communication services, promotion of networks and 
consortia, publicizing the results of research and possibly through 
facilitating the setting of international research priorities and strategic 
frameworks. 

 
5)  Partnerships, consortia, networks, etc. are extremely import approaches 

for the new entity, especially those that bring together different actors 
along the value chain. The most appropriate role might be to actively 
encourage the creation of regional and international consortia and 
networks, and to participate in them (though rarely, if ever, lead them), 
primarily through the provision of relevant information and facilitating 
communications. Although the new entity would not have a comparative 
advantage in taking a leading role in setting up and running networks or 
consortia at the national level, it might assist in such cases through 
providing guidelines, examples of best practice, etc.  

 
6)  The new entity should be active in the policy arena, especially at the 

international and regional levels, both through direct policy analysis and 
the preparation of policy briefs by its staff, and through contracting or 
partnership arrangements with specialists in other institutions.   

 
7)  Awareness raising among donors and key policy- and decision-makers, 
especially at the international level, would seem to be highly relevant for 
the new entity. It should seek to highlight the potential contribution of many 
underused species and thereby seek to raise support and create a more 
favourable environment for research and development. More specific and 
focussed awareness of particular crops or products, and opportunities for 
expanding their production and use, are probably best left to actors or 
consortia directly involved in the commodity concerned, often, but not 
exclusively at the national level. However, the new entity might be in a 
position to provide advice and other assistance to such efforts. The new 
entity should probably not be directly involved in primary research to 
obtain data demonstrating the value of underused species. However, 
given the need for good quality data to underpin both awareness raising 

44

 

 

and policy advocacy, it is suggested that the new entity promote the 
collection of such data and help compile, synthesise and analyse it to 
increase its utility and value.    

 
8)  The existence or creation of effectively functioning markets, and linking 
producers and processors with such markets are vital to the success of 
efforts to increase the use of most underused species. In order to promote 
a better understanding of the importance of markets and how they 
operate, and to be able to provide advice and backstopping on how to 
influence them, how to maximize marketing opportunities and how to 
access and work with them, the new entity might consider such activities 
as, inter alia: 

a.  maintaining a database, or linking to existing databases of 

marketing expertise, both of individuals and institutions 

b.  conducting case studies and determining best practice for a range 

c.  preparing and disseminating guidelines and examples of best 

of different situations; 

practice;  

d.  promoting the creation of consortia that link producers with 

processors and local or international markets; 

e.  promoting the concept of value chains;  
f.  supporting training in such areas as entrepreneurship, processing, 
storage, marketing, packaging, labelling, quality control, regulatory 
requirements etc.;  

g.  providing know-how on how and where to access local and 

international market information and, if feasible, provide links to 
relevant information sources 

9)  Good donor relations and effective fundraising to support its own 

programme and administrative needs are essential – and will doubtless be 
a major responsibility of the CEO. The case for the new entity helping to 
raise funds for others, however, is less clear and should probably be 
avoided, apart from its role in raising awareness of the potential 
contribution of many underused species among donor agencies as well as 
among appropriate ministries in developing countries that have a mandate 
to provide funding at the national level (Ministries of Agriculture, Science 
and Technology, Environment, Finance, Commerce etc.).  It might also 
consider making information available on the existence of specific funding 
sources and opportunities and how to tap into them.  

 
10) There is a very real sense that most of the activities of the new entity 

would, in one way or another, contribute to building capacity.  However, 
given the huge size and complexity of the task, the new entity should 
probably not aim to be a primary provider of education or training. More 
specifically, it is suggested that the new entity be active in developing and 
disseminating appropriate training materials and in promoting access to 

45

 

 

materials developed by others. It should aim to influence curricula and to 
provide information on available education and training opportunities. 
There may well be opportunities for higher degree students to conduct 
their thesis research in association with the new entity, and staff could, to 
a limited extent, be encouraged to give lectures, or occasionally even to 
run courses.  

If resources allow, the new entity might also give consideration to taking on 
one or more of the following activities: 

1)  Conducting primary or field-based research is generally considered not 
appropriate for staff of the new entity.  However, to the extent that staff 
members are actively involved in research, this might best be carried out 
through the analysis of secondary data and/or through supervising interns, 
Associate Experts or higher degree students.  

2)  There may be a role for the new entity to develop and maintain one or 
more primary databases. However, it is strongly suggested that prior to 
making any major new moves in this direction, an in-depth study/survey be 
carried out of stakeholder information needs as well as of other already 
existing, readily accessible information sources that might, with or without 
modification or strengthening, serve to meet such needs.  

  
3)   With respect to fostering the development of broadly-based communities 
of practice, three areas suggest themselves as worthy of consideration by 
the new entity: a) the creation of appropriate web-based services aimed at 
creating an international community of stakeholders (such as setting up 
on-line discussion fora etc.), b) the publication of a newsletter having this 
as one of its objectives, and/or c) facilitating the creation of appropriate 
communities of practice and support systems at the national level (for 
example, promoting the establishment of national underused crops 
support units).  

 
4)  Developing and promoting generic concepts, models and decision tools is 

an appropriate activity for an international institution. However, it is 
suggested that before making any moves in this direction, the new entity 
might consider consulting with other relevant institutions with the aim of 
defining an appropriate programme of work that would result in the 
creation and dissemination of clearly identified and needed outputs. In 
general, other partner institutions might best carry such work, possibly with 
the new entity playing a facilitating role.   

 
5)  While shared priorities and strategies underlie most successful 

partnerships, efforts spent to develop them are arguably most useful in 
guiding focussed action at the local and national levels where the new 

46

 
 

 

 

 

entity would have little comparative advantage except to provide guidance 
and support. It could, however, to the extent such priorities and strategies 
are needed, take a more proactive and leading role at the regional and 
international levels, e.g. in developing strategic frameworks for the regions 
not yet covered by the work of ICUC and GFU. 

 
6)  While the new entity will undoubtedly want to monitor its progress and 

evaluate its impact, both to help improve its own performance and to be 
able to demonstrate to its donors the wise use of the funds provided, the 
extent to which this should become a more general service activity is 
questionable. However, the experience gained through its own monitoring 
and evaluation activities is likely to put the entity in a good position to help 
others, e.g. through the provision of guidelines and advice. This could be 
especially helpful at the level of individual crops or projects, where such 
monitoring and evaluation should become routine. Setting up systems for 
monitoring and evaluating more general progress in expanding the use of 
neglected and underused crops, going beyond just an aggregation of data 
on individual crops, while extremely difficult might usefully be attempted in 
collaboration with other relevant institutions. 

 
 
7) Institutional Options 
The terms of reference of the study call for presenting institutional options with 
respect to issues such as staffing, length of life of the entity, potential host 
institution (if any) and location. Questions 7 to 9 of the questionnaire sought 
feedback on these issues and the results have informed the discussion 
presented in the following sections.  
 
Nature of the institution:  
There are perhaps two main broad options for the form that the new entity could 
take: an institution conducting hands-on research in its own right or a facilitating 
and catalytic service based largely on information and knowledge management.   
 
While only one respondent felt that it should be established as an international 
research institution (analogous to a CGIAR Centre and having a staff of 30 – 50 
scientists conducting hands-on research), a number of others felt that it should 
take on a dual research and facilitating role. A number of respondents, however, 
felt the facilitating role alone was more appropriate and sufficient, and some 
explicitly rejected the idea of any hands-on research, both on the grounds of cost 
and because it could compromise the facilitating and service function. It is thus 
suggested that he new entity function in this way, i.e. as a facilitating and 
catalysing institution, but based on the arguments in section 6 above, this should 
probably not exclude it taking on a minor role in research, especially in 
synthesising and analysing secondary data relating to policy issues.  
 

 

47

One respondent, emphasizing the proposed information function, suggested that 
the new entity be established specifically as an umbrella organization to oversee, 
publicise and raise funds for the three plant resources foundations: PROTA 
(Plant Resources of Africa), PROSEA (Plant Resources of South-East Asia) and 
PROLAC (Plant Resources of Latin America and the Caribbean)10. While the new 
entity should undoubtedly forge a close working relationship with these 
foundations, the majority of respondents clearly see a very important role for it 
that goes significantly beyond this proposal, or any other similarly narrow one.  
 
As to whether the new entity should take on the role of an information-based 
service unit (rather like GFU today) or assume more the role of establishing, 
leading or coordinating networks or consortia (more akin to ICUC’s modus 
operandi), the former role was generally seen as the more relevant.  As one 
respondent stated: “everyone likes to coordinate, nobody likes to be 
coordinated”. While elements of the new entity’s programme would undoubtedly 
involve promoting, fostering, backstopping and participating in networks and 
consortia, it is doubtful that the new entity would have a significant comparative 
advantage in taking on a major on-going leadership role in many, if any such 
arrangements beyond their establishment phase.   
 
The question was raised as to what institutional form the entity should take. 
Options suggested included:  

•  a programme of another national or international institute.  
•  a System-wide Programme of the CGIAR 
•  a Challenge Programme of the CGIAR 
•  a consortium or platform for action 
•  an autonomous or semi-autonomous institution hosted either by a CGIAR 

Centre or other international or national institution  

•  a ‘free-standing’ international institution 

 
Most of these options were considered in some detail in the excellent discussion 
paper prepared by Jaenicke and Hoeschle-Zeledon (2006) and the arguments 
pro and con the various options will not be repeated here. They are, however, 
reproduced in full in Annex 6 for anyone wishing to refer to them.   
 
Based on this analysis, and the feedback received through the questionnaire and 
interviews, it is strongly suggested that consideration be given to establishing a 
new, semi-autonomous entity, hosted by a well-functioning and technically 
appropriate institution. Such an arrangement would provide a solid administrative 
and legal basis for the new entity that, in turn, would hopefully inspire donor 
confidence. The hosting arrangements should be set up so as to allow for a 
reasonable measure of independence and an ability to pursue its own mission 
without undue influence from the hosting institution. At the same time, the entity 
should be sufficiently integrated into the host institution to be able to capture 

                                            

10The name PROW was suggested: Plant Resources of the World 

 

48

programme synergies that result from the association. This is explored further in 
the next section. 
 
While clearly the new entity should take on many of the functions and programme 
elements of both ICUC and GFU, it should probably be selective about this, 
mindful of its new mission, programme focus and modus operandi. To achieve 
this, it is suggested that it be set up as a new entity in its own right, de novo, and 
not through a formal merger between GFU and ICUC, or as a take-over of one by 
the other.  However, the question arises as to who should be responsible for 
establishing the new institution if it is not to be a merger or take over? The 
Boards might wish to consider various options here including appointing an 
implementing agency (possibly a donor), or taking on the role themselves, 
possibly through establishing a joint committee or working group.   
 
Host institution and governance arrangements: 
If it is decided that the new entity should be hosted by another, already 
established institution as suggested above, the questions arise as to what is the 
desired relationship between the two and which institutes should be approached 
concerning their possible interest in hosting the new entity.    
 
On the first question, it would seem desirable that a formal agreement be 
reached between the implementing agency or committee (or other responsible 
body) and the host institution, outlining the terms and conditions of the hosting 
arrangements. As the entity will probably not have its own independent legal 
personality, at least initially11, this agreement should establish the legal basis of 
the entity within that of the host institute. This will undoubtedly require that it 
come under the overall fiscal and programmatic policies of the host institute and 
the governance of its Board of Trustees (or other legally responsible body). 
However, the agreement should make clear that for all practical purpose, 
providing there are no conflicts, the entity should be free to pursue its mission 
unhindered and in line with the directions set by its own oversight body.  Such a 
body could take a number of forms, from a purely technical advisory body to an 
executive steering committee with both programmatic and managerial decision-
making authority. It could comprise eminent individuals acting in their own 
capacity, or representatives of key partner and stakeholder organizations. 
Something in between these extremes is probably desirable; perhaps a 
Programme and Budget Oversight Committee comprising individuals acting in 
their own capacity as well as one or two ex-officio members (such as the entity’s 
CEO and a representative of the host institute). Due care must be paid to 
achieving an acceptable balance among members with respect to areas of 
expertise, gender, nationality, discipline, age etc. and it is recommended that 
whatever form it takes, its size be kept small, ideally to no more than 6 – 8 
people. 
                                            
11 It can take a considerable time and expense to obtain a legal personality, especially if it is to be 
recognized under international law. This may well not be necessary unless required by one or 
more significant donors.  

 

49

 
With respect to possible host institutions, one decision that needs to be made is 
whether it should be a national or international institution, Both have advantages 
and disadvantages. Advantages of national institutions include:  

•  being closer the ultimate beneficiaries and ‘action’  
•  spin-off benefits for the hosting institution  

Disadvantages include:  

lack of international legal status  

• 
•  generally little experience hosting international staff and visitors – and 

internal policies and procedures may hinder this.  

 
In the case of international institutions advantages include:  

• 

international legal status is assured, with concomitant privileges and 
immunities;  

•  experience with, and set up to handle international staff and visitors with 
respect to such things as visas and work permits, travel arrangements, 
housing, schooling, handling international compensation packages, etc.;  

Disadvantages include: 

•  being further from ultimate beneficiaries   
•  probably more expensive 

 
While there are a number of instances of international organizations being 
successfully hosted but national ones, the overall advantages of an international 
host would seem compelling. 
 
To help decide on a suitable choice of host institution, it might be helpful to 
consider the following:  

It should be working on relevant topics, ideally closely related to the 
interests of the new entity.  
It should have a critical mass of staff with whom the entity can interact on 
programmatic and technical matters. 
It should regard hosting the entity as adding to its own programmatic 
interests, strengths and stature and hence actively want to act as host.  
Its desire to host should ideally be reflected in its willingness to grant 
generous terms and conditions in the hosting arrangements. 

While several international organizations meet the first two conditions as is 
evident from their mandates and programme structures, the last two can best be 
assessed by direct discussion with the institutions themselves – or by tendering. 
Those that best meet the first criteria – i.e. that have the greatest programme 
affinity and a critical mass of relevant staff include, inter alia: AVRDC, Bioversity 
International, CIAT, FAO, ICARDA, ICRISAT, IITA and the World Agroforestry 
Centre. Of these, the ones with probably the best programme ‘fit’ are: AVRDC, 
Bioversity International, FAO and the World Agroforestry Centre. All have 
experience with similar hosting arrangements.  

• 

• 

• 

• 

 

 

 

50

Location:   
The question arises as to whether it is best to adopt a centralised or 
decentralised institutional structure. Given the likely small number of the staff 
(see below) it is probably better to centralise, to help ensure a critical mass in 
one location. However, consideration should be given to out-posting staff to other 
locations as and when opportunities and resources allow.  
  
The location of the headquarters was regarded by many – but not all - 
respondents to the questionnaire as an important factor in the choice of hosting 
institution. However there was no clear consensus as to whether a developing or 
developed country location is to be preferred. The former is closer to at least a 
sample of the beneficiaries and ‘action’, and sends out a strong message of 
commitment to development. Staff and office costs are generally lower in 
developing countries, but the pool of skilled people may be smaller. A location in 
a developed country on the other hand is likely to ensure a larger pool of skilled 
personnel upon which to draw and possibly a better security situation. They also 
tend to offer better telecommunications facilities and greater international travel 
connections, although a number of developing countries compare well in such 
respects. Fears that donor support is likely to be less if the entity is located in a 
developed country are probably largely unfounded. Some felt that location in a 
developed country would help ensure that all developing regions get treated 
equally – or at least help to assuage fears that this would not be the case. There 
was, however, general agreement that whatever location was finally decided 
upon, it should afford opportunities for interaction with a range of other relevant 
institutions and programmes including, ideally, international as well as national 
ones.  
 
Given the arguments above, it is suggested that the following be considered as 
possible hosting institutions and locations for the new entity, in general order of 
priority: 
•  Bioversity International: probably the institution with the greatest 

programmatic affinity. It has extensive and largely very positive experience of 
hosting other entities, including GFU. Rome is an important global 
communications hub with excellent access to all regions, and is an important 
centre for a number of other relevant agricultural organizations including FAO, 
GFAR, The Global Crop Diversity Trust, IFAD and the World Food 
Programme. Italy, a country, has taken an interest in underused crops 
nationally and internationally, with work underway at several national 
institutions. If a developing country location is to be preferred, one option 
would be to locate in one of Bioversity’s regional offices, for example in its 
Regional Office for Sub-Saharan Africa on the ICRAF campus in Nairobi.    

•  FAO: has slightly less programmatic affinity than Bioversity International, but 
has a perceived neutrality that the CGIAR system sometimes lacks. It has the 
same advantages and disadvantages of the Rome location as Bioversity, but 
FAO bureaucracy can be onerous.   

 

51

•  World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF): the Nairobi campus of ICRAF offers a lot 

of advantages and houses a number of relevant institutions, including the 
regional or country offices of many of the other CGIAR Centres. It is also 
adjacent to the UNEP campus. There has been a considerable amount of 
work on underused crops in Kenya, by various national institutions NGOs etc. 
However while the new entity should probably give highest priority to working 
in Sub-Saharan Africa, individuals in other regions might look negatively on 
such a choice of location. Other regions of the world, with the exception of 
Southern Africa and possibly West Africa, are generally less accessible from 
Nairobi than from Rome.  

•  World Vegetable Centre (AVRDC): while location in the HQ of AVRDC in 

Taiwan is probably ruled out for political reasons, co-location with the Global 
Horticultural Initiative’s headquarters at AVRDC’s regional office for Africa in 
Arusha, Tanzania could be considered. It is likely to be the cheapest option 
and the work of AVRDC, and of GHI in particular, is very relevant to that of 
the new entity. While it also has the advantage of being “very near the 
coalface”, communications can be a problem and it has many of the same 
overall advantages and disadvantages of an East African location as does 
Nairobi.  

 
In conclusion, while it is it is believed that Bioversity International offers the best 
institutional hosting option by virtue of its programme affinity and location, others 
should also not be ruled out, especially if they are significantly cheaper. It is 
suggested that each candidate institution be sounded out as to their interests in 
hosting, and the terms and conditions under which they would be willing to take 
this on. Once such information has been assembled, together with cost estimates 
of the various options, a final decision can be made.  
 
Staffing: 
Funding realities are likely to determine that the staff complement, at least at the 
outset, be very small. This was also the general view of most respondents to the 
questionnaire. Assuming an initial senior scientific/professional staff of four 
(internationally and/or regionally recruited), expertise might be considered for 
recruitment in the following areas:  

•  crop production (diversification strategies, participatory research and/or 
value chains – n.b. genetic resources and breeding are well covered by 
other institution) 

•  socio-economics/policy 
•  marketing/product development 
• 

information management  

 
One of these positions would be that of the CEO, with an added responsibility for 
management, and fundraising. If additional positions were possible, they should 
probably be for communications/public awareness and/or for post harvest 
technology/processing.  
 

 

52

Of equal or greater importance to the disciplinary background of the staff is their 
‘people skills’; their ability to communicate and network, to build partnerships and 
to inspire confidence and trust.  
 
In addition to the full-time professionals, local part-time staff and/or consultants 
might be needed in such areas as information technology, policy analysis, 
administration, writing, editing, translation, data entry etc. The entity needs to be 
innovative about its staffing, and actively seek opportunities for staff 
secondments from other organizations and to take on less expensive or honorary 
staff such as retired professionals, honorary fellows, Associate Professional 
Officers, PhD students and the like.  
  
Lifespan: 
Given the proposed nature of the new entity, it is likely that it can serve a useful 
function for many years to come. However, while it may not make sense to set it 
up with a strict sunset clause, it should be subject to regular external reviews with 
a real possibility of termination if it is judged that the need for its services no 
longer exists or if it fails to meet clear milestones. Such reviews should probably 
take place every five years, possibly with a small mid-term review after the first 
three years to help make sure things are on track and to provide an external input 
to its development in its early, formative years.  
 
Name: 
Question 8 of the questionnaire invited respondents to suggest a name for the 
new entity. A list of all names submitted is given in Annex 7.  A few people 
declined to suggest a name but made the following comments: 

•  The name should suggest that it is NOT business as usual 
•  No acronyms – one single full name 
•  Both ‘underutilized’ and ‘neglected’ have a somewhat negative 

connotation (as one of my old friends put it: ‘why is Germany supporting 
unimportant crops? ….).  It may be useful to sacrifice being precise and 
all-inclusive for something simple, such as ‘New Crops’.  OK – perhaps not 
that simple! 

•  Stay away from ‘underutilized’ but focus on the potential.  
•  underutilised plants should be called 'promising' plants 

 
Given the advice for simplicity, a term like ‘Service’ might be preferable to 
‘Facilitation Unit’  - and both would give a more accurate impression of the 
entity’s proposed function than ‘Institute’ or ‘Centre’.  On this logic, ‘Global New 
Crops Service’, ‘World New Crops Service’ or ‘New Crops Service International’ 
might be considered. However, for greater simplicity still names such as ‘New 
Crops Service’, ‘New Crops International’ or ‘Crops of the Future’ might offer the 
best solution of all – or going simpler still, one person suggested the name 
‘Novoplants’  
 
 

 

53

8) Conclusions 
  
This report has tried to demonstrate that there is a clear and on-going need for 
an international entity to help catalyse, backstop, promote and publicise work on 
underused crops for the benefit of the poor and the environment.  The services 
provided to date by ICUC and GFU are widely recognized as being of very 
considerable value and both are to be congratulated on their many 
achievements. The proposed action promises to result in the establishment of an 
entity that is even more efficient and effective, and one with the potential to 
achieve an even greater impact. However, there is undoubtedly a minimum size 
and critical mass of staff – possibly four senior staff members - below which the 
entity would risk failure. It is very much hoped that donor support will be 
forthcoming to not only guarantee such a minimal operation, but to go well 
beyond it, enabling the new entity to work and provide services across a much 
broader front. Such an entity would have much to offer and could be decisive in 
the success of efforts worldwide to capitalize on the potential of so many 
underused crops and to promote their use in the fight against poverty and 
malnutrition and in the struggle to achieve a sustainable future.

 

54

ANNEX 1 
   

          
 
 

                                            

 

Underutilized Plant Species Research and Development Activities  

– Review of issues and options 

 
Background 
Plant biodiversity plays a critical role in food and nutrition security of households, 
human and environmental health and other aspects of the overall livelihoods of 
people.  However,  globalization  of  trade  and  changing  lifestyles  have  favoured 
only  few  major  crops  that  have  come  to  dominate  national  and  international 
agricultural research and production and commerce. These species are now the 
basis of world’s agriculture with all the well-known negative side effects on agro-
ecosystems  and  on  the  livelihoods  of  many  small  farmers  in  developing 
countries. Not only are a number of food species falling into disuse and are being 
replaced  by  the  main  commodities,  but  also  many  other  species  belonging  to 
other categories such as fibres, medicinal plants, fodder species or those used in 
traditional  construction.  However,  these  neglected  and  underutilized  plant 
species are part of a rich diversity and human culture, and they have a vital role 
to  play  in  sustainable  livelihoods,  human  well-being  and  ecosystem  health  and 
stability. There is increasing understanding among scientists, policy-makers and 
development  specialists  that  they  make  valuable  contributions  to  the  following 
specific areas:  

Income generation  

o  Food and nutrition security and health 
o 
o  Cultural identity 
o  Biodiversity  
o  Environmental risk management 
 

Many achievements have been made by different stakeholders in the promotion 
of underutilized species as important assets to improve livelihoods. However, 
during broad consultations carried out over the past years by the International 
Centre for Underutilised Crops (ICUC) and the Global Facility for Underutilized 
Species (GFU) further need for leadership in creating a stronger evidence base 
for these contributions was identified. 
 

 

55

Whilst GFU and ICUC both have played significant roles as champions in that 
field, their desire for closer institutional collaboration provides opportunity for a re-
assessment of the role of a joint entity as a catalyst and intelligent knowledge br 
oker, adding value to other initiatives. The two organisations have started the 
process of consultation with an open brainstorming meeting during CGIAR-AGM 
in December 2006 (background document and minutes attached) which in itself 
built upon the jointly developed Strategic Framework for Underutilized Plant 
Species Research and Development. 
 
Terms of Reference 
An independent consultant is now being sought to carry out the following tasks: 
 

1)  Review of available information of ongoing and pipeline research and 

development activities on underutilized plants of major actors (e.g. from 
the GFU database, CGIAR Centre MTPs) and identify their comparative 
advantages. 

2)  Interview major actors in the field of underutilized crops on their 

perceptions regarding the role of the joint entity. 

3)  From these results suggest a profile for the entity that includes thematic as 

well as institutional options, staffing, length of life of the entity, potential 
host institution (if any) and location 

4)  Identify key partners to ensure success and impact of the entity’s 

operations  

 
Duration  
The duration of the consultancy will be for a maximum of 15 days and will be 
performed between 01 June and 31 July 2007. 
 
The consultant will submit a draft report to the chairs of the GFU Steering 
Committee (Eric Kuenemann: eric.kueneman@fao.org) and the ICUC Scientific 
Advisory Board (george.rothschild@btopenworld.com) by 15 July 2007.  

 

56

ANNEX 2 

Questionnaire 

 

The Future of the International Centre for Underutilised Crops 
(ICUC) and the Global Facility for Underutilized Species (GFU) 
 

The globalization of trade and changing lifestyles have favoured only a few major crops 
and  these  have  come  to  dominate  agricultural  production,  commerce  and  research, 
nationally and internationally. Not only are a number of food species falling into disuse, 
to  be  replaced  by  the  major  commodities,  but  also  many  other  species  are  similarly 
affected,  such  as  those  that  can  contribute  fibre,  medicine,  fodder,  or  construction 
material.  However,  these  neglected  and  underused  plant  species  are  part  of  a  rich 
diversity, and many have the potential to play a much more important role than they do 
today in sustaining livelihoods, human well-being and ecosystem health and stability.  
 
The International Centre for Underutilised Crops (ICUC) and the Global Facility for 
Underutilized Species (GFU) have both been promoting and backstopping efforts aimed 
at realizing the potential of these species, through acting as a catalyst, facilitator and 
intelligent knowledge broker, conducting hands-on research and development activities, 
and through backstopping and adding value to the initiatives of others. Recently they 
have expressed the desire for closer institutional collaboration or integration, thus 
providing an excellent opportunity for a re-assessment of the role that such a joint or 
integrated entity could best play, its objectives and how it might be best organized and 
managed.  
 
To help provide guidance to moves in this direction, the views are being sought, through 
this questionnaire, of some of the main actors in the field. We welcome not only your 
reaction to the specific questions raised below, but also any other relevant comments or 
suggestions you may have.  
 
It would be very much appreciated if you could respond to as many of the questions 
below as you feel able to address, and return the questionnaire by 28 June either 
electronically to:  geoffhawtin@hotmail.com  
 
or in hard copy to:  
Geoff Hawtin 
Manor Farm House 
17 Front Street 
Portesham  
Dorset,  DT3 4ET,  
United Kingdom 
 
Many thanks for your assistance in this process – it is very highly appreciated.  
 

 

57

 1) Name of respondent:  
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
2) Address of respondent  
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
3) Are you or your institution directly involved with neglected and underused species and 
if so in what capacity (e.g. research, funding etc.)  
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
4) What do consider the main barriers preventing the greater use of neglected and 
underused species?   
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
5) What should be the main objectives of the new entity? 
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
……………………………………………………………………….. 
 
 
6) Please indicate against each activity listed a - n below, your rating of how important 
you feel it is for the new entity to carry out the activity indicated.  Please indicate whether 
you feel the activity is (1) essential  (2) highly desirable (3) desirable  (4) not very 
important or (5) not at all important to be carried out by the new entity. 
 
Please add any clarifying/supplementary information and comments to each activity you 
regard as important, as well as any additional activities not listed.  
 

a.  Providing an information clearing house/global knowledge management service 
(if possible, please specify the main subjects of, or target audiences for such a 
service) 

     Rating:  …………………………….. 

 

 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

58

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

      
b.  Undertaking hands-on research and development activities on specific species 
     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

      
c.  Policy analysis and advocating for policy change 
     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

      
d.  Providing links to market research and intelligence organizations and systems 
     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

   
e.  Promoting market-oriented action and the concept of value-chains  
     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

      
f.  Fostering the development of a broad-based underused species community at 

the national and international levels  
      Rating:  …………………………….. 
 
     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

       
g.  Increasing awareness among targeted audiences and the general public of the 

importance and potential of neglected and underused species  

     Rating:  …………………………….. 
 
     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

      
h.  Capacity building, education and training   
     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

 
i.  Promoting partnerships, convening consortia, backstopping networks etc.   
     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

 

59

      
j.  Donor liaison and fundraising  
     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

      
k.  Developing and promoting generic concepts, models and decision tools for 

research and development 

     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

      
l. 

 Promoting the establishment of priorities and strategies at the local, national 
and international level 

     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

      
m.  Developing baseline data and indicators for monitoring and evaluating progress 

in the expanding use of neglected and underused crops 

     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

   
n.  Conducting or supporting research and compiling evidence to demonstrate the 

value of underused species  

     Rating:  …………………………….. 

     Comments:  ….…………………………………………………….. 

      
o.  Please add any additional activities you feel should be undertaken by the new 

entity: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  ……………………………………………………………………….. 
   
  ……………………………………………………………………….. 
   

7) Please provide any comments, suggestions or recommendations you may have 
regarding the organization, structure and management of the new entity, particularly with 
respect to: 
 

I.  Staffing (number of professional staff, main disciplines required, etc.)  
   ……………………………………………………………………….. 
  ……………………………………………………………………….. 
   

 

60

II.   Modus operandi (hands-on research vs. playing a catalytic, facilitating role; 

centralized vs. decentralized operation etc.)   

   ……………………………………………………………………….. 
  ……………………………………………………………………….. 
   

III.  Location of headquarters (developed vs. developing country, preferred continent, 
and/or indicate the most important factors to be taken into account in deciding the 
location)  

   ……………………………………………………………………….. 
  ……………………………………………………………………….. 
    

IV.  Institutional arrangements  (fully independent vs. being hosted by another 

institution – national or international – vs. being incorporated as a programme 
within another institute, etc.) 

 ……………………………………………………………………….. 
  ……………………………………………………………………….. 
   

V.  Other 

   ……………………………………………………………………….. 
  ……………………………………………………………………….. 
  

8) Can you suggest an appropriate name for the new entity? 
          ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
9) Lifespan (should there be a set lifespan for the new entity? If so, what?)  
        ……………………………………………………………………… 
 
 
10) Any other comments or suggestions 

……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
……………………………………………………………………………………… 
 
……………………………………………………………………………………… 

 

61

ANNEX 3   
 
List of individuals who responded to the questionnaire  
 

Name 
Azam-Ali, Sayed 
Beer, John 
Bennett, Andrew 
Bordoni, Paul 
Diekmann, Marlene  
Engle, Liwayway 
Engels, Jan 
Frison, Emile 
Galan, Victor 
Gale, Mike 
Guarino, Luigi 
Haq, Nazmul,  
Hegde, Narayan 
Hoeschle-Zeledon, Irmgard  GFU, Rome, Italy 
Hoogendoorn, Coosje 
Iwanaga, Masa 
Jaenicke, Hannah 
Janick, Jules 
Janssen, Willem 
Karki, M & Rawat RBS 
Kueneman, Eric 
Siand, Lim Eng 
Maru, Ajit 
McNeely, Jeff 
Meschinelli, Alessandro 
Ochatt, Sergio 
Oshaug, Arne 
Padulosi, Stefano 
Palmer, John 
Prabhu, Ravi 
Siemonsma, Jan 
Solh, Mahmoud 
Sonwa, Denis 
Swaminathan, M.S. 
Williams, J.T.  

Institution 
University of Nottingham, UK 
CATIE, Turrialba, Costa Rica 
Syngenta Foundation, Basel, Switzerland 
GFU, Rome, Italy 
BEAF, Bonn, Germany 
AVRDC, Tainan, Taiwan 
Bioversity, Rome 
Bioversity International, Rome, Italy 
ICIA, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain 
CGIAR Science Council, Norwich, UK 
Global Crop Diversity Trust, Rome Italy 
SCUC, Southampton University, UK 
BAIF, ICUC Scientific Advisory Board, Pune, India 

INBAR, Beijing, China 
CIMMYT, El Batan, Mexico 
ICUC, IWMW, Battaramulla, Sri Lanka 
CNCNP, Purdue University, USA 
World Bank, Washington, USA 
ICIMOD, Khumaltar, Nepal 
FAO, Rome, Italy 
Ex Min of. Agriculture, Malaysia 
GFAR Secretariat, Rome, Italy 
IUCN, Gland, Switzerland 
IFAD, Rome, Italy 
INRA, Dijon, France 
Akershus University College, Norway 
Bioversity International, Rome, Italy 
Forest Management Trust, Gainsville, Florida, USA 
ILRI, Nairobi, Kenya 
PROTA, U. of Wageningen, Netherlands 
ICARDA, Aleppo, Syria 
IITA, Yaounde, Cameroon 
MSSRF, Chennai, India 
ex ICUC Board, Cheadle, UK 

 

 

62

ANNEX 4 
 
Results of Question number 6a – 6n: 
 
Each of the following possible activities was rated (1) essential  (2) highly 
desirable (3) desirable  (4) not very important or (5) not at all important to be 
carried out by the new entity. The following provides the average score and the 
number of respondents in each of the five categories. Where respondents gave a 
rating that was intermediate between two of the five values, the score has been 
counted as being in the higher category. 
 

a)  Providing an information clearing house/global knowledge management 

service (if possible, please specify the main subjects of, or target 
audiences for such a service) 
 
Average score (35 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

  1.49 
25 
  6 
  2 
  1 
  1 

b)  Undertaking hands-on research and development activities on specific 

c)  Policy analysis and advocating for policy change 

 

 

 

species 
 
Average score (33 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

 
Average score (34 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

systems 
 
Average score (33 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

  3.15 
  7 
  3 
  8 
  7 
  8 

  1.88 
17 
  8 
  6 
  2 
  1 

  2.20 
  7 
17 
  5 
  3 
  1 

 

63

d)  Providing links to market research and intelligence organizations and 

e)  Promoting market-oriented action and the concept of value-chains  

 
Average score (33 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

  2.21 
  7 
15 
  9 
  0 
  2 

f)  Fostering the development of a broad-based underused species 

community of at the national and international levels  
 
Average score (34 responses): 
  
Number rated essential (1):  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

  1.99 
12 
12 
  8 
  1 
  1 

g)  Increasing awareness among targeted audiences and the general public 

of the importance and potential of neglected and underused species  
 
Average score (34 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

  1.75 
18 
  8 
  6 
  2 
  0 

 

 

 

 

i)  Promoting partnerships, convening consortia, backstopping networks etc.   

h)  Capacity building, education and training   

 
Average score (35 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

 

 
Average score (35 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

 
j)  Donor liaison and fundraising  

Average score: 
 
Number rated essential (1):  

 

  2.16 
10 
13 
  8 
  4 
  0 

  1.71 
18 
11 
  4 
  2 
  0 

  1.69 
20 

 
  

64

 

k)  Developing and promoting generic concepts, models and decision tools for 

Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

  8 
  5 
  2 
  0 

research and development 
 
Average score (34 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

national and international level 
 
Average score (35 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

  2.26 
10 
10 
  9 
  5 
  0 

  2.17 
10 
13 
  7 
  5 
  0 

 

 

 

l)  Promoting the establishment of priorities and strategies at the local, 

m) Developing baseline data and indicators for monitoring and evaluating 

progress in the expanding use of neglected and underused crops 
 
Average score (34 responses): 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 
 

  2.35 
  8 
10 
12 
  4 
  0 

n)  Conducting or supporting research and compiling evidence to demonstrate 

the value of underused species  
Average score (34 responses): 
 
Number rated essential (1):  
  
Number rated highly desirable (2): 
Number rated desirable (3): 
 
Number rated not very important (4): 
Number rated not at all important (5): 

  2.53 
  8 
12 
  6 
  4 
  4 

 

65

ANNEX 5 
 
Indicative list of institutions active in research and development 

of underused crops  

 
 
The following lists some of the main institutions involved in research and development of 
underused crops, in addition to ICUC, GFU and the IARCs of the CGIAR. It has been 
assembled largely as an extract from the GFU database, supplemented by a few other 
sources such as information from Annex 4 of the Strategic Framework for Underutilized 
Plant Species Research and Development published by ICUC, GFU and IPGRI. It 
should be noted, however, that while the GFU database is very useful, its coverage 
tends to be biased to the Anglophone world and of necessity it lists only those 
institutions and projects that have agreed to be included or have provided information. 
The following therefore does not aim to be complete in any way, and may, in some 
cases be out of date, but has been included here mainly to illustrate the extremely large 
range of different types of organization involved in different aspects of the work on 
underused species.   
 
International and regional institutions:  
Centro Agronomico Tropical de Investigacion y Ensenanza (CATIE), Costa Rica: has 
many activities involving underused crops, including maintaining a large grmplasm 
collection of fruits, vegetable, palms and others. One example of a project involving 
underused crops is on the participatory domestication of indigenous fruits (Byrsonima 
crassifolia, Sapodilla (Manilkara zapota)) in Meso-America. 
 
The World Vegetable Centre (AVRDC), Taiwan: has extensive activities on underused 
vegetable species. It conserves the most diverse collection of vegetable germplasm in 
the world with more than 55,000 accessions of about 300 different species from at least 
140 countries. It is active in research and development of indigenous vegetables in Asia 
and has a web site and information service dedicated to this. It has a regional Centre for 
Africa in Tanzania that works, inter alia, on indigenous African vegetables and hosts the 
Global Horticultural Initiative (see ‘Networks and consortia’ below). 
 
The Arab Center for the Studies of Arid Zones and Dry Lands (ACSAD), Damascus, 
Syria: has programmes on fruit trees, plant biodiversity and plant genetic resources, 
covering both major and minor crops such as pistachio and indigenous vegetables, as 
well as on wild relatives of the many crops that were domesticated in the region. 
 
U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Rome, Italy: has undertaken a huge body 
of work over the years on underused species. It has had a number of specific field 
projects in many parts of the world to study and promote them, as well as on indigenous 
knowledge. The FAO Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture is an 
important intergovernmental forum concerned, inter alia, with the genetic resources of 
underused species. The FAO Global Plan of Action for the Conservation and 
Sustainable Utilization of Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture has as one 
of its 20 priority areas for action: “Promoting development and commercialization of 
under-utilised crops and species”. 
 

 

66

Management of Social Transformations Programme, United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO - MOST): has a programme entitled the 
“Indigenous Food Plants Programme” that is compiling a database of the indigenous 
food plants of Kenya and promoting the cultivation, consumption and marketing of these 
foods.  
 
Fundación Promocion e Investigacion de Productos Andinos (PROINPA): has a number 
of projects and activities including: 
1  Maintaining the germplasm bank of Andean grains (SIBTA) - Bolivia 
2  Contribution of neglected and underutilized species for food security and for resource 

poor rural populations 

3  Genetic improvement of quinoa  
 
Plant Resources of Tropical Africa (PROTA), Netherlands: is an international foundation 
that networks with a large number of development and other organizations, within and 
outside tropical Africa. It is a sister institution of PROSEA in Indonesia and aims to 
reduce the existing wealth of information of useful plant species to manageable 
proportions and to make the knowledge synthesis readily available by means of web 
databases, a multi-volume handbook, and a series of CD-Roms. 
 
Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC), Fiji: coordinates the Pacific Agricultural 
Plant Genetic Resources Network and includes work on such species as taro, breadfruit, 
yams, pandanus and local fruit and nuts. 
 
National governmental research institutions  
Institut d'Economie Rurale (IER), Mali: is involved in collecting, conserving and 
characterising underused species as well as research on adaptation, propagation, 
nutritional characteristics, and marketing (e.g. baobab, tamarind, amaranth, and shea). It 
has a project on improving the production of Bambara groundnut in the Sudano-Sahelian 
zone of Mali 
 
Indonesian Fruit Research Institute (IFRURI): among the underused fruits worked on are 
breadfruit, as a source of staple food in eastern Indonesia, and sapota as a potential 
income source in Sumatra. 
 
Papua New Guinea National Agricultural Research Institute: works on a wide variety of 
crops, cropping systems and post-harvest technology including, in addition to the major 
staples of PNG, emerging crops such a pyrethrum and traditional vegetable crops such 
as aibika (Abelmoschus manihot) and the two species of pitpit: Setaria palmifolia and 
Saccharum edule. 
 
Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC): has recently initiated a programme of 
research and development of ten underused crops. Emphasis is on collecting and 
evaluating indigenous landraces. 
 
Research Institute for Fruits and Vegetables (RIFAV), Vietnam: has a breeding 
programme for underused Vietnamese and exotic fruit and vegetable species. 
 
Industrial Technology Institute (ITI) Sri Lanka: conducts applied research to develop and 
promote the food industry. It works with such crops as such as jackfruit 
(Artocarpus heterophyllus), breadfruit (A. altilis), rambutan (Nephelium lappaceum), beli 

 

67

(Aegle marmelos), kirala (Sonneratia caseolaris), soursop (Annona muricata), wood 
apple (Feronia limonia) and durian (Durio zibethinus). 
 
Nepal Agricultural Research Council (NARC): has a limited R&D programme on 
buckwheat, finger millet, oat, barley and minor legumes and oilseed crops. 
 
Agro Enterprise Centre (AEC), Nepal: is the business development/promotion unit of the 
Federation of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce and Industry and was involved in the 
identification of underutilized fruits of significance in Nepal: lapsi (Choerospondias 
axillaris), bael (Aegle marmelos) and jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus). This program 
was initiated under ICUC with DFID financial support. 
 
Centre de coopération internationale en recherche agronomique pour le développement 
(CIRAD) France: has numerous projects involving underused species. Two examples 
are: 
•  Root Crops Agrobiodiversity in Vanuatu (involving Alocasia macrorhiza, 

Amorphophallus campanulatus, Colocasia esculenta, Cyrtosperma chamissonis, 
Xanthosoma sagittifolium and 8 Dioscorea species) 

•  Upgrading quality and competitiveness of fonio (Digitaria exilis) for improved 

livelihoods in West Africa  

•  Producing added value from under-utilized tropical fruit crops with high commercial 

potential (PAVUC) (Anacardium occidentale, Bactris gasipaes, Cyphomandra 
betacea, Euterpe oleracea, Hylocereus purpusii, Myrciaria dubia, Myrtillocactus 
schenki, Solanum quitoense)  

 
Gesellschaft fur Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) GmbH, BMZ/GTZ Sectoral Project 
Managing Agrobiodiversity in Rural Areas: has several on-going and planned projects 
including:  
•  Sustainable Use of Balsam of Peru, Sierra de Bálsamo, El Salvador  
•  Underutilized Plants and Breeds in the South American Chaco Region  
•  Fostering the Production Chains of Tropcial Fruits from the Amazon Region, Ecuador 
Impact of the EU Novel Food Regulation on development activities promoting exotic 
• 
foods 

•  Protection by Utilization: Economic Potential of Neglected Breeds and Crops in Rural 

Development 

 
International Program for Arid Land Crops (IPALAC), Ben Gurion University, Israel: has 
a project in Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Mali, Niger and Senegal  on promoting development 
through introduction and evaluation of plants from other regions. Species involved 
include: Acacia colei, Annona reticulata, Balanites aegyptiaca, Capparis spinosa, 
Ceratonia siliqua, Hibiscus sabdariffa, Jatropha curcas, Mangifera indica, Moringa 
oleifera, Phoenix dactylifera, Psidium guajava, Quercus alba, Tamarindus indica, 
Tamarix aphylla, Ziziphus mauritiana  
 
Istituto Agronomico per l'Oltremare (IAO): is involved in cooperative project with Brazil 
on the Conservation and sustainable use of PGRs, especially PGRFA and wild species 
traditionally used for food, condiment, traditional herbal medicine, in several locations 
within three biomes (Amazonia, Cerrado, Caatinga). 
 
Institute of Botany - Vilnius, Lithuania: has several projects including: 

 

68

• 

Investigations on genetic diversity and conservation of wild small fruits and 
underutilized horticultural crops  

•  Assessment of genetic stability and variability of plant genetic resources of medicinal 

and aromatic plants and development of conservation strategies  

•  Evaluation of habitats of Arnica montana in Southern Lithuania and the development 

of a management plan 

 
Universities 
University of Mauritius: works on aromatic and medicinal plant and other lesser-known 
and underutilized plant resources. It maintains a database of such species. 
 
School of Agronomy & Horticulture, University of Queensland, Australia: manages the 
Australian New Crops Website, produces a newsletter and a range of other publications 
on new crops, It has an active research programme that currently includes research 
project on Echinacea angustifolia, German chamomile, ginseng, essential oils from 
potential new crops including geranium, moth bean (Vigna aconitifolia) cashew, millets, 
guar (Cyamopsis tetragonoloba), and Marama bean 
 
Center for New Crops and Plant Products, Department of Horticulture and Landscape 
Architecture, Purdue University, USA: operates a broad range of information services 
including:  
•  CropINDEX A list of scientific and common names of crops 
•  CropSEARCH A search engine to access crop information  
•  CropMAP A nation-wide (US) location-specific crop information system 
•  Current Projects Classes, presentations, websites 
•  CropREFERENCE Books and manuals on crops 
•  CropEXPERT Directory of new crop resource personnel 
•  NewCropEVENTS Conferences, events and upcoming symposia 
•  NewCrop DISCUSSION GROUP An e-mail list for discussion, and information  
•  Aromatic-MedicinalPLANTS A guide to aromatic & medicinal plants 
• 
IMPORT—EXPORT Plant quarantine information for all countries. 
•  Famine Foods A list of unconventional food sources 
•  NewCrop LINKS 
 
School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham: has been working collaboratively with 
institutions in Western and Southern Africa on bambara groundnut for almost 20 years 
through projects such as:  
•  EU Framework Programmes  3  and 5 bambara groundnut projects 
•  Soil moisture and the proximate composition of bambara groundnut seeds 
•  Vegetable milk production and basic protein functionality systems in bambara 

groundnut 

•  Phenotypic and genetic diversity in bambara groundnut landraces 
•  Opportunities for increased utilisation of bambara groundnut in Southern Africa 
 
Agricultural Economics Research Institute (LEI); part of Wageningen University and 
Research Centre (WUR): has a project on the Participatory Enhancement of Diversity of 
Genetic Resources in Asia (PEDIGREA) which uses a farmer field school approach to 
focus on local vegetables (in addition to rice and local farm animal breeds) in Indonesia 
(Java), Philippines (Mindanao) and Cambodia. 

 

69

 
Agroforestry and Novel Crops Unit, School of Tropical Biology - James Cook University: 
has projects entitled: 
•  Domestication of indigenous fruit and nut trees in Solomon Islands.. 
•  Domestication and commercialisation of multi-purpose indigenous trees in Papua 

New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Australia 

•  Genetic diversity of Sandalwood in Vanuatu and Queensland, Australia 
 
Department of Crop Sciences: Tropical Crops - University of Gottingen: had a project 
entitled: Diversity, Domestication and Development of New and Underutilized Crops – 
Developing “neglected” crops and exploring potentially “new” crop plants. The project 
focuses mainly on the hyacinth bean (Lablab purpureus). 
 
Department of Horticulture, University of Florence: had a project that ended in 2003 
entitled the “Conservation, evaluation and collection of minor fruit tree species”.  
 
Department Plant Production - Laboratory Tropical and Subtropical Agronomy and 
Ethnobotany - University of Ghent: has projects on: 
•  Promotion of sustainable Cherimoya Production Systems in Latin America through 

the Characterization, Conservation and Use of Local Germplasm Diversity 
(CHERLA) 

•  Domestication and development of baobab and tamarind (DADOBAT) 
 
CAZS Natural Resources, University of Wales, Bangor, UK:  coordinates a network, 
IndigenoVeg, that aims to bring together a network of leading EU and sub-Saharan 
African researchers to promote the production of indigenous vegetables (including 
Basella rubra, Corchorus olitorius, and Solanum nigrum) in urban and peri-urban 
agriculture. 
 
Southampton Centre for Underutilised Crops (SCUC), University of Southampton, UK: 
undertakes projects in several parts of the world, especially in Asia and Africa. In 
September 2007 it is hosting an international symposium on ‘New Crops and Uses: their 
role in a rapidly changing world’. Projects include, for example: 
• 
•  Collection, conservation and utilisation of niger and sesame in Nepal 
•  Collection, characterisation, conservation and propagation of selected underutilised 

Indigenous crop diversity among smallholders in Malawi 

crops in Sri Lanka 

•  Germplasm collection, evaluation and propagation of amla and tamarind in Pakistan 
 
 
NGOs 
Local Initiatives for Biodiversity, Research and Development (LI-BIRD), Nepal: has had 
several projects and initiatives concerning underused crops. Currently the Seed for 
Survival project aims to improve the socio-economic status of por rural and marginalized 
farmers through conservation and management of agro-biodiversity. 
 
BAIF Development Research Foundation, India: works with a wide range of rural 
development activities in several parts of India. Many underused fruit-tree species have 
been introduced on a small scale, mainly on field borders and bunds. Various fruits are 
being popularised including custard apple (Annona squamosa), ber (Zizyphus 

 

70

mauritiana), tamarind (Tamarindus indica), jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus) and 
Indian gooseberry (Emblica officinalis). 
 
M.S Swaminathan Research Foundation (MSSRF), India: has a project on Enhancing 
the contribution of nutritious but neglected crops to food security and to incomes of the 
rural poor: Asia component - Nutritious Millets (Eleusine coracana, Panicum miliare, 
Panicum sumatrense, Setaria italica).  
  
PROPAGE – MORINGANEWS (France): is an NGO based in France that provides 
information on Moringa production and consumption in Southern Togo and is 
Investigating markets for Moringa leaves. 
 
SAVE Foundation, St.Gallen branch, Switzerland: convenes a network,   
Fruit-Net, that aims to  record and catalogue the genetic diversity of "neglected" or 
"forgotten" fruit and berry varieties in Europe  
 
Society for Research and Initiatives for Sustainable Technologies and Institutions 
(SRISTI): has an ongoing project on incentives and policies for supporting on-farm 
cultivations and conservation of less known or underutilized crops.  
 
International  Society  for  Horticultural  Science  (ISHS):  has  a  Working  Group  on 
Underutilized  Species  is  the  latest  recognition  by  the  scientific  community  of  the  role 
played by NUS in people’s livelihoods and the need for greater synergy and increased 
efforts to support them.   
 
International Initiative for Non-food Crops: a UK-based charitable foundation based at 
Imperial College, Wye Campus. It aims to facilitate specific pilot projects in developing 
countries, establish a web-based information hub and champion the full potential of non-
food crops. 
 
Private Sector Companies 
Private For-Profit organizations come in a vast range of shapes and sizes and it is 
impossible to list many here. They range from small seed merchants and processors to 
international agro-industrial giants and supermarket chains. Only a couple of examples 
are given here: 
 
Tulimara, Zimbabwe: a private limited company based in Harare that focuses on 
processing and commercialising underused crops such as indigenous beans, wild fruits 
and herbal tea.  
 
High Value Horticulture (3TL) Limited, UK: is a technical, management and marketing 
consultancy based in the UK and has worked in more than 50 countries worldwide. It 
works with companies in the establishment, development and expansion of business 
across the supply chain from production, through processing and product formulation to 
the identification and development of markets. It specializes in spices, essential oils and 
medicinal plants - from traditional medicines, nutraceuticals and phytopharmaceuticals to 
the flavours and fragrances industries. 
 
 
Donors 

 

71

Many donors support work on underused crops. DFID (UK) and BMZ (Germany) have, 
for example, been very generous in their support to ICUC and GFU, and IFAD is 
supporting a major project with IPGRI. This list does not aim to include mention of all 
donors who support work on underused crops but rather give just a couple of examples 
of donor organizations that are themselves actively and technically involved in the 
projects they support, beyond providing funds.  
 
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR): supports a number of 
projects on underused crops for example:  
•  The role of women in the production and marketing of indigenous vegetable in 

Vietnam 

•  The re-commercialisation of the PNG pyrethrum industry  
 
McKnight Foundation (USA):  is supporting a number of projects around the world that 
involve R&D on underused crops. These include:   
•  Sustainable production of quinoa, a neglected food crop in the Andean region 
•  Development of High-yielding, Disease-resistant, and Drought-tolerant Finger Millet 

Genotypes  

•  Development of Mechanisms for Sustainable Production, Utilization, and 
Management of Genetic Diversity of Indigenous Vegetables in Uganda. 

•  Strengthening Food Security and the On-farm Conservation of Andean Tubers in the 

Fragile Ecosystem of the Southern Peruvian Highlands. 

 
 
Networks and consortia 
The Global Horticulture Initiative (GHI): was launched in 2006 in Montpellier France, 
under the auspices of the World Vegetable Center (AVRDC), CIRAD, and the 
International Society for Horticulture Science (ISHS). The initiative will begin by focusing 
on alliaceous, cucurbitaceous, leguminous, and solanaceous vegetables, tropical and 
subtropical tree fruits, and indigenous horticultural crops. Activities for ornamentals, 
aromatic and medicinal plants will be added later. The Initiative is developing its work 
through the following Interwoven Research Themes as Platform for Collaboration:  
•  Management and Dissemination of Knowledge 
•  Germplasm Conservation and Evaluation 
•  Genetic Improvement 
•  Sustainable Production Technologies 
•  Efficient and Profitable Supply Chains 
•  Post-harvest Storage, Processing, Packaging and Marketing 
• 
 
European Cooperative Programme for Crop Genetic Resources Networks (ECP/GR): 
has several activities relating to underused crops, including: 
•  The ECP/GR Brassica Working Group 
•  The ECP/GR Working Group on Medicinal and Aromatic Plants 
•  Minor Crops Network 
 
Genetic Resources Network for West and Central Africa (GRENEWECA/ROCAREG): 
has a project on promoting fonio production in West and Central Africa through 
germplasm management and post harvest technology 
 

Impact Analysis and Policy Planning 

 

72

Govind Ballabh Pant University Of Agriculture and Technology: provides the coordination 
for the All India Coordinated Research Project on Underutilized Crops. implemented at 
the national and local level through Indian Council of Agricultural Research. Crops 
covered include: Amaranthus caudatus, Amaranthus hypochondriacus, Chenopodium 
album, Coix lacryma-jobi, Fagopyrum esculentum, Fagopyrum tataricum, Perilla 
frutescens, Vigna angularis and Vigna umbellata  
 
PELUM Association: is a regional network of 160 civil society organisations in east, 
central and southern Africa, which is working towards sustainable agriculture, food 
security, and sustainable community development in the region. The Association plans 
to host its 6th Triennial General Assembly in October 2008 on the theme “Promoting 
indigenous underutilized crop varieties and species as the most viable means of 
enhancing food security and food sovereignty” 
 
Southern Alliance for Indigenous Resources (SAFIRE): in Zimbabwe promotes the use 
of underused crops, especially through research on processing for nutritional 
supplements and for use by people with HIV/AIDS. It also works on managing the 
natural resource base from which these crops are harvested. It develops products for 
commercialisation by private companies.  
 
Participatory Enhancement of Diversity of Genetic Resources in Asia (PEDIGREA): is a 
Southeast Asian consortium that aims to strengthen the capacity of local communities to 
improve their own crop and animal germplasm and to create a market for their products. 
It is active in Indonesia (West Java), Philippines (Mindanao) and Cambodia. In 
underused crops it works with  Benincasa hispida, Luffa cylindrica, Momordica charantia 
and Solanum melongena.  

 

73

ANNEX 6 
 

Institutional options – Food for thought 

 
Taken from the discussion paper by Hannah Jaenicke (ICUC) and Irmgard 
Hoeschle-Zeledon (GFU) 2006: Contributing to the CGIAR System Priorities 
– The future of underutilized plants research and development.   
 
“In this section several options for a future institutional set up are discussed. Delineation 
between the models is fluid, and other options exist which are not discussed here for 
reasons of brevity.  
  
3.1 Absorption of either unit into the other 
The Global Facilitation Unit is a Global Partnership Programme of GFAR, initiated by 
BMZ, FAO, ICUC, IFAD and Bioversity International. In its current arrangement, GFU is 
integrated into Bioversity International as part of the Institute’s Global Partnerships 
Programme. It has its independent Steering Committee and an independent budget. 
GFU’s main mandate is to create an enabling environment for stakeholders who are 
engaged in developing underutilized species. It deals with cross-cutting issues relevant 
for all stakeholders and most underutilized species.  
  
Absorbing ICUC into GFU without changing its scope and mandate would mean (apart 
from lower transactions costs): positively:  
• better access to ICUC’s networks  
• direct access to crop research activities  
• better compatibility with the concept of GFAR’s Global Partnership Programme  
• strengthening of Bioversity International’s overall role as underutilized species 
advocate  
  
negatively:  
• GFU at present is not mandated to carry out crop-specific research and training 
activities – this would be lost from ICUC’s agenda  
• ICUC’s networks would lose their coordinator since they have specific MoUs with ICUC  
  
The International Centre for Underutilised Crops is an independent institution which is 
currently hosted – and thus covered administratively and legally – by IWMI. ICUC has its 
own Scientific Advisory Board and dedicated budget. Its mandate is the provision of 
expertise and support in research activities of national partner organizations, many of 
which have signed specific Memoranda of Agreement with ICUC’s Southampton-based 
predecessor. ICUC is involved in its own – limited – research and development activities 
on specific underutilized crop species. It is currently active in Asia and Africa but is also 
playing a role as a global champion of underutilized crops and has been leading with 
GFU in the recent development of the new Strategic Framework.  
 
Absorbing GFU into ICUC without changing its scope and mandate would mean (apart 
from lower transaction costs):  
positively:  
• benefit of direct access to GFU’s links and databases  
• stronger voice in political lobbying  
• increased global activities and visibility  

 

74

 
negatively:  
• ICUC is not a GFAR partnership programme, so the links provided through this setup 
would be lost  
• underutilized plant activities managed from a Water Management Institute is not a 
credible setup  
  
3.2 Center Core activity  
Description: ICUC and GFU would cease to exist as individual units and their current 
work would be fully integrated into a Center’s core activities. For the Center concerned, it 
would mean strengthening and expanding its existing activities, such as the Trees and 
Markets Theme at ICRAF, or the Neglected and Underutilized Species project at 
Bioversity International.   
  
Advantages: Possibly the easiest option from a donor’s point of view as it can be 
supported simply by an increase to the Center’s funding; full integration into the Center’s 
priorities; access to core funding.  
  
Disadvantages: Not flexible and  limited to Center’s priorities; life time depends on the 
Center’s policy; not a separate identity; no obvious incentive for coordination between 
Centers.  
  
3.3 System-wide Programme hosted and led by one particular Center  
Description: SWPs are one of the mechanisms used by the CGIAR to enhance inter-
Center collaboration and activity. There are a number of well functioning examples e.g. 
SGRP, CAPRI, SLP.  
  
Advantages: Facilitates inter-Center collaboration and ensures that it produces results 
relevant for all participating Centers and other partners; cost sharing between 
Centers/partners; no limited life span; strong own identity with governance vested with 
the convening Center; streamlines work within Centers; flexible enough to collaborate 
with non-CG partners; transaction costs moderate.   
  
Disadvantages: Operates well only if the participating Centers and partners are fully 
committed. Identity as a CG-System Programme may constrain collaboration with private 
sector (the private sector is a very important partner for underutilized plants research 
and development).  
  
3.4 Challenge Program  
Description: A CGIAR Challenge Program (CP) is a time-bound, ndependently-governed  
program of high-impact research that targets the CGIAR goals in relation to complex 
issues of overwhelming global and/or regional significance, and requires partnerships 
among a wide range of institutions in order to deliver its products. There are now 4 
Challenge Programs in the CGIAR – all are managed differently, however, all are 
consortia with CGIAR, ARI and NARES core partners carry out their research agenda 
through a combination of their  
own research and subcontracted activities.   
  
Since the CGIAR expects a consortium approach in research on important challenges, 
such as the conservation and utilization of existing genetic diversity of underutilized 
plants (CGIAR, 2005), an underutilized plant research and development CP would 

 

75

address well the System Priorities. There is currently debate about initiating a new CP 
on “Horticulture for  
Nutrition”, similar to, or aligned with, the AVRDC-led Global Horticulture Initiative. The 
scope of such a CP would definitively include many underutilized species such as fruits 
and vegetables but is likely to neglect grains and pulses, non-timber forest products and 
all the plant-based foods collected in the wild. It would also exclude all work on 
underutilized species which are used for energy, medicinal, ornamental, fiber purposes. 
An alternative would be to open the scope of this proposed CP to include these other 
functions.   
  
Advantages: Commitment by consortium partners, especially if run as a joint venture; 
addresses global goals; support of NARS as a funding body aligned to a central 
strategy; strong international voice; significant funding base thus able to ‘make a 
difference’.   
  
Disadvantages: Consortium approach is an inflexible model as partners are fixed. It 
operates through projects, i.e. with limited lifespan (5-year cycles with significant 
administrative inputs required for extension). High administrative overheads to manage 
consortium partners; limited to a clearly defined challenge (e.g. the development of 
particular underutilized species in a specific region); still not proven whether CP add 
value over other forms of partnerships.  
  
3.5 Entity functioning from within a CGIAR Center  
Description: Such an entity operates with its own identity from within a Center which is 
usually its implementing agency, whilst it is overseen by a broad range of stakeholders 
(Steering Committee with members from different organizations). It could have the 
characteristics of a Facilitation Unit such as the GFU or have a more network type of 
operation such as ICUC. GFU is an integral part of Bioversity International’s programme 
structure. ICUC is an independent organization which receives administrative support 
only from its hosting organization, IWMI. A formal network like COGENT operates less 
flexibly and its Steering Committee is limited to the network members. The networks’ 
efficiency greatly depends on the commitment and capacity of the members.   
  
Advantages: A hosted or integrated entity within a Center is usually very flexible. 
Partners can change easily. NARS partners are strengthened. The Center provides 
administrative support and a legal ‘home’ under the Center’s host country agreement. It 
involves minimal transaction costs. Fund raising for the entity can be facilitated by the 
Center (lends its name and reputation). Life time is not dependent on a change of the 
Center’s priorities as it could be moved easily to another Center.   
  
Disadvantages: Future as a separate entity may be weak if it is very close to Center core 
activities; limited visibility and power to the outside world. Fund raising may be difficult as 
donors fund already other projects of the Center or provide core funding which would 
not, or only under difficulties, be accessible to the entity.   
  
3.6 Center/unit outside CGIAR   
There are several options for such a setup: either there would be a fully operational 
international research and/or development NGO, or we could imagine a setup as unit of 
another international player, such as for example FAO.  
  
Most international research centers, such as ICIPE, AVRDC, INBAR, are however 

 

76

closely associated with the CGIAR, and many are considered by the donor community 
as de facto CGIAR Centers, i.e. their funding is provided from the same budget line.   
  
Advantages: As an independent Center the new entity would enjoy relative flexibility in 
setting its research and development priorities. The Center would attract non-CGIAR 
funding as well as CGIAR funding (similarly to ICIPE and AVRDC); local ownership 
might be stronger than if inside the CGIAR – some of these Centers are 
intergovernmental networks (INBAR, ICIMOD); can have long life (depending on 
funding)...  
  
Disadvantages: Suffers the not-in-the-club syndrome; may find it difficult in future to 
maintain funding base if outside of CGIAR, has to cope with all administrative costs, 
needs substantial staffing; may be inhibited by country partners’ different ability to 
contribute. If international status sought, legal registration may be difficult.  
 
The entity could also be part of a large non-research intergovernmental organization, 
such as FAO. Similar issues as discussed above for the CGIAR may apply, such as 
integration into existing structures, visibility, access to funding.   
  
Advantages: The entity would have access to FAO’s country links and its large and 
diverse bank of expert knowledge; it would be able to directly influence FAO’s agenda in 
various areas.  
  
Disadvantages: As part of such a large organization, the new entity might have limited 
visibility; funding may be difficult and insecure.” 

 

77

ANNEX 7 
 

Possible Names 

 
The following list of names were those suggested by people responding to question 8 of 
the questionnaire, inviting suggestions on a name for the new entity: 
 

•  Association for the Advancement of New Crops (AANC) 
•  Challenge Programme on Underutilized Species (CPUS) 
•  Crops of the Future 
•  Cropversity 
•  Global Facilitation Unit for Neglected and Underutilized Species (GFU-NUS) 
•  Global Facility for the Conservation and Utilization of Underutilized Species 

• 

• 

• 
• 
• 

• 
• 

(GFCUUS) 
International Centre for Development (of Facilitation) of Underutilised Crops 
(ICDUC or ICFUC) 
International Centre for Enlarging the Food Basket and Strengthening Nutritional 
Security (ICEFBSNS) 
International Centre for Exploring the Diversity of Agricultural Species (ICEDAS) 
International Centre for Integrated Underutilised Crops (ICIUC) 
International Centre for Research and Development in Underutilised Crops 
(ICRDUC) 
International Centre for Underutilised Crops (ICUC) 
International Institute for Under-Utilized Agricultural Crops and Animal Species 
(IIUACAS) 
International Institute for Underutilized Crops (IIUC) 
International Neglected and Under-utilised Crops Research Facility (INUCRF) 
International New Fruits Institute  (INFI) 

• 
• 
• 
•  Networks on Underutilized Species 
•  Novoplants: plants for diversified livelihoods 
• 
•  Partnership Initiative for Under-Utilized Crops (PIUC) 
•  Phoenix Institute (Plants for Health, Occupation and Environment through 

livelihoods 

Networking, Information and eXchange) 

•  Plant Diversity International 
•  Plant Resources of the World (PROW)  
•  Underutilised Crops International (UCI) 
•  Versatile Income-generating Bigger Edible Species (VIBES) 
•  World Underutilised Species Centre (WUSC) 

 
 

 

78

