Food Analysis  
Fourth Edition

edited by
S. Suzanne Nielsen
Purdue University
West Lafayette, IN, USA

ABC

II

p a r t

CompositionalAnalysis
ofFoods

6

c h a p t e r

Moisture and Total Solids
Analysis

RobertL.Bradley,Jr.
DepartmentofFoodScience,UniversityofWisconsin,
Madison,WI53706,USA
rbradley@wisc.edu

6.1 Introduction 87

6.1.1 Importance of Moisture Assay 87
6.1.2 Moisture Content of Foods 87
6.1.3 Forms of Water in Foods 87
6.1.4 Sample Collection and Handling 87

6.2 Oven Drying Methods 88

6.2.1 General Information 88

6.2.1.1 Removal of Moisture 88
6.2.1.2 Decomposition of Other Food

Constituents 89

6.2.1.3 Temperature Control 89

6.2.1.4 Types of Pans for Oven Drying

Methods 90

6.2.1.5 Handling and Preparation of

Pans 90

6.2.1.6 Control of Surface Crust Formation

(Sand Pan Technique) 90

6.2.1.7 Calculations 91

6.2.2 Forced Draft Oven 91
6.2.3 Vacuum Oven 91
6.2.4 Microwave Analyzer 92
6.2.5 Infrared Drying 93

S.S. Nielsen, Food Analysis, Food Science Texts Series, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1478-1_6,
c(cid:2) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

85

86

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

6.2.6 Rapid Moisture Analyzer Technology 93

6.3 Distillation Procedures 93

6.3.1 Overview 93
6.3.2 Reﬂux Distillation with Immiscible

Solvent 93

6.4 Chemical Method: Karl Fischer Titration 94
6.5 Physical Methods 96

6.5.1 Dielectric Method 96
6.5.2 Hydrometry 96

6.5.2.1 Hydrometer 97
6.5.2.2 Pycnometer 97

6.5.3 Refractometry 98

6.5.4 Infrared Analysis 99
6.5.5 Freezing Point 100

6.6 Water Activity 101
6.7 Comparison of Methods 101

6.7.1 Principles 101
6.7.2 Nature of Sample 101
6.7.3 Intended Purposes 102

6.8 Summary 102
6.9 Study Questions 102
6.10 Practice Problems 103
6.11 References 104

Chapter 6 • Moisture and Total Solids Analysis

87

6.1 INTRODUCTION

Moisture assays can be one of the most important
analyses performed on a food product and yet one of
the most difﬁcult from which to obtain accurate and
precise data. This chapter describes various methods
for moisture analysis – their principles, procedures,
applications, cautions, advantages, and disadvan-
tages. Water activity measurement also is described,
since it parallels the measurement of total moisture
as an important stability and quality factor. With an
understanding of techniques described, one can apply
appropriate moisture analyses to a wide variety of
food products.

6.1.1 Importance of Moisture Assay
One of the most fundamental and important analytical
procedures that can be performed on a food product
is an assay for the amount of moisture (1–3). The dry
matter that remains after moisture removal is com-
monly referred to as total solids. This analytical value
is of great economic importance to a food manufac-
turer because water is an inexpensive ﬁller. The fol-
lowing listing gives some examples in which moisture
content is important to the food processor.

1. Moisture is a quality factor in the preservation

of some products and affects stability in
(a) Dehydrated vegetables and fruits
(b) Dried milks
(c) Powdered eggs
(d) Dehydrated potatoes
(e) Spices and herbs

2. Moisture is used as a quality factor for

(a) Jams and jellies to prevent sugar crystalliza-

tion

(b) Sugar syrups
(c) Prepared cereals – conventional, 4–8%;

puffed, 7–8%

3. Reduced moisture is used for convenience in

packaging or shipping of
(a) Concentrated milks
(b) Liquid cane sugar (67% solids) and liquid

corn sweetener (80% solids)

(c) Dehydrated products (these are difﬁcult to

package if too high in moisture)

(d) Concentrated fruit juices

4. Moisture (or solids) content is often speciﬁed
in compositional standards (i.e., Standards of
Identity)
(a) Cheddar cheese must be ≤39% moisture.
(b) Enriched ﬂour must be ≤15% moisture.
(c) Pineapple juice must have soluble solids of

≥10.5˚Brix (conditions speciﬁed).

(d) Glucose syrup must have ≥70% total solids.
(e) The percentage of added water in processed

meats is commonly speciﬁed.

5. Computations of the nutritional value of foods

require that you know the moisture content.

6. Moisture data are used to express results of
other analytical determinations on a uniform
basis [i.e., dry weight basis (dwb), rather than
wet weight basis (wwb)].

6.1.2 Moisture Content of Foods
The moisture content of foods varies greatly as shown
in Table 6-1 (4). Water is a major constituent of most
food products. The approximate, expected moisture
content of a food can affect the choice of the method
of measurement. It can also guide the analyst in deter-
mining the practical level of accuracy required when
measuring moisture content, relative to other food
constituents.

6.1.3 Forms of Water in Foods
The ease of water removal from foods depends on how
it exists in the food product. The three states of water
in food products are:

1. Free water: This water retains its physical prop-
erties and thus acts as the dispersing agent for
colloids and the solvent for salts.

2. Adsorbed water: This water is held tightly or is
occluded in cell walls or protoplasm and is held
tightly to proteins.

3. Water of hydration: This water is bound chem-
ically, for example, lactose monohydrate; also
some salts such as Na2SO4 · 10H2O.

Depending on the form of the water present in a
food, the method used for determining moisture may
measure more or less of the moisture present. This
is the reason for ofﬁcial methods with stated proce-
dures (5–7). However, several ofﬁcial methods may
exist for a particular product. For example, the AOAC
International methods for cheese include: Method
926.08, vacuum oven; 948.12, forced draft oven; 977.11,
microwave oven; 969.19, distillation (5). Usually, the
ﬁrst method listed by AOAC International is preferred
over others in any section.

6.1.4 Sample Collection and Handling
General procedures for sampling, sample handling
and storage, and sample preparation are given in
Chap. 5. These procedures are perhaps the greatest
potential source of error in any analysis. Precau-
tions must be taken to minimize inadvertent mois-
ture losses or gains that occur during these steps.

88

6-1
table

FoodItem

Moisture Content of Selected Foods

Approximate

PercentMoisture

(WetWeight

Basis)

Cereals, bread, and pasta
Wheat ﬂour, whole-grain
White bread, enriched (wheat ﬂour)
Corn ﬂakes cereal
Crackers saltines
Macaroni, dry, enriched

Dairy products

Milk, reduced fat, ﬂuid, 2%
Yogurt, plain, low fat
Cottage cheese, low fat or 2% milk fat
Cheddar cheese
Ice cream, vanilla

Fats and oils

Margarine, regular, hard, corn,

hydrogenated
Butter, with salt
Oil-soybean, salad, or cooking

Fruits and vegetables

Watermelon, raw
Oranges, raw, California navels
Apples, raw, with skin
Grapes, American type, raw
Raisins
Cucumbers, with peel, raw
Potatoes, microwaved, cooked in skin,

ﬂesh and skin

Snap beans, green, raw

Meat, poultry, and ﬁsh

Beef, ground, raw, 95% lean
Chicken, broilers and fryers, light

meat, meat and skin, raw

Finﬁsh, ﬂatﬁsh (ﬂounder and sole
species), raw
Egg, whole, raw, fresh

Nuts

Walnuts, black, dried
Peanuts, all types, dry roasted

with salt

Sweeteners

Peanut butter, smooth style, with salt

Sugar, granulated
Sugar, brown
Honey, strained or extracted

10.3
13.4
3.5
4.0
9.9

89.3
85.1
80.7
36.8
61.0

15.7

15.9
0

91.5
86.3
85.6
81.3
15.3
95.2
72.4

90.3

73.3
68.6

79.1

75.8

4.6
1.6

1.8

0
1.3
17.1

From US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service
(2009) USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Ref-
erence. Release 22. Nutrient Data Laboratory Home Page,
http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl

Obviously, any exposure of a sample to the open
atmosphere should be as short as possible. Any heat-
ing of a sample by friction during grinding should
be minimized. Headspace in the sample storage con-
tainer should be minimal because moisture is lost from
the sample to equilibrate the container environment

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

against the sample. It is critical to control temperature
ﬂuctuations since moisture will migrate in a sample to
the colder part. To control this potential error, remove
the entire sample from the container, reblend quickly,
and then remove a test portion (8, 9).

To illustrate the need for optimum efﬁciency and
speed in weighing samples for analysis, Bradley and
Vanderwarn (10) showed, using shredded Cheddar
cheese (2–3 g in a 5.5-cm aluminum foil pan), that
moisture loss within an analytical balance was a
straight line function. The rate of loss was related
to the relative humidity. At 50% relative humidity, it
required only 5 s to lose 0.01% moisture. This time
doubled at 70% humidity or 0.01% moisture loss
in 10 s. While one might expect a curvilinear loss,
the moisture loss was actually linear over a 5-min
study interval. These data demonstrate the necessity of
absolute control during collection of samples through
weighing, before drying.

6.2 OVEN DRYING METHODS

In oven drying methods, the sample is heated under
speciﬁed conditions, and the loss of weight is used
to calculate the moisture content of the sample. The
amount of moisture determined is highly dependent
on the type of oven used, conditions within the oven,
and the time and temperature of drying. Various oven
methods are approved by AOAC International for
determining the amount of moisture in many food
products. The methods are simple, and many ovens
allow for simultaneous analysis of large numbers of
samples. The time required may be from a few minutes
to over 24 h.

◦

6.2.1 General Information
6.2.1.1 RemovalofMoisture
Any oven method used to evaporate moisture has as
its foundation the fact that the boiling point of water
is 100
C; however, this considers only pure water at
sea level. Free water is the easiest of the three forms
of water to remove. However, if 1 molecular weight
(1 mol) of a solute is dissolved in 1.0 L of water, the
boiling point would be raised by 0.512˚C. This boil-
ing point elevation continues throughout the mois-
ture removal process as more and more concentration
occurs.

Moisture removal is sometimes best achieved in a
two-stage process. Liquid products (e.g., juices, milk)
are commonly predried over a steam bath before dry-
ing in an oven. Products such as bread and ﬁeld-dried
grain are often air dried, then ground and oven dried,
with the moisture content calculated from moisture

Chapter 6 • Moisture and Total Solids Analysis

89

loss at both air and oven drying steps. Particle size,
particle size distribution, sample sizes, and surface
area during drying inﬂuence the rate and efﬁciency of
moisture removal.

6.2.1.2 DecompositionofOtherFood
Constituents
Moisture loss from a sample during analysis is a
function of time and temperature. Decomposition
enters the picture when time is extended too much
or temperature is too high. Thus, most methods for
food moisture analysis involve a compromise between
time and a particular temperature at which limited
decomposition might be a factor. One major prob-
lem exists in that the physical process must sepa-
rate all the moisture without decomposing any of the
constituents that could release water. For example,
carbohydrates decompose at 100
C according to the
following reaction:

◦

C6H12O6 → 6C + 6H2O

[1]

The moisture generated in carbohydrate decomposi-
tion is not the moisture that we want to measure.
Certain other chemical reactions (e.g., sucrose hydrol-
ysis) can result in utilization of moisture, which would
reduce the moisture for measurement. A less serious
problem, but one that would be a consistent error, is
the loss of volatile constituents, such as acetic, pro-
pionic, and butyric acids; and alcohols, esters, and
aldehydes among ﬂavor compounds. While weight
changes in oven drying methods are assumed to be
due to moisture loss, weight gains also can occur due
to oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids and certain
other compounds.

Nelson and Hulett (11) determined that mois-
ture was retained in biological products to at least
◦
365
C, which is coincidentally the critical temperature
for water. Their data indicate that among the decom-
position products at elevated temperatures were CO,
CO2, CH4, and H2O. These were not given off at
any one particular temperature but at all temperatures
and at different rates at the respective temperature in
question.

By plotting moisture liberated against tempera-
ture, curves were obtained that show the amount
of moisture liberated at each temperature (Fig. 6-1).
Distinct breaks were shown that indicated the tem-
perature at which decomposition became measurable.
None of these curves showed any break before 184
C.
Generally, proteins decompose at temperatures some-
what lower than required for starches and celluloses.
Extrapolation of the ﬂat portion of each curve to 250˚C

◦

6-1
f i g u r e

◦

Moisture content of several foods held at vari-
ous temperatures in an oven. The hyphenated
line extrapolates data to 250
F, the true mois-
ture content. [Reprinted with permission from
(11) Nelson OA and Hulett GA. 1920. The
moisture content of cereals. J. Industrial Eng.
Chem. 12:40–45. Copyright 1920, American
Chemical Society.]

gave a true moisture content based on the assump-
tion that there was no adsorbed water present at the
temperature in question.

6.2.1.3 TemperatureControl
Drying methods utilize speciﬁed drying tempera-
tures and times, which must be carefully controlled.
Moreover, there may be considerable variability of
temperature, depending on the type of oven used for
moisture analysis. One should determine the extent
of variation within an oven before relying on data
collected from its use.

Consider the temperature variation in three types
of ovens: convection (atmospheric), forced draft, and
vacuum. The greatest temperature variation exists in
a convection oven. This is because hot air slowly cir-
culates without the aid of a fan. Air movement is
obstructed further by pans placed in the oven. When
the oven door is closed, the rate of temperature recov-
ery is generally slow. This is dependent also upon
the load placed in the oven and upon the ambient
temperature. A 10
C temperature differential across
a convection oven is not unusual. This must be con-
sidered in view of anticipated analytical accuracy and
precision. A convection oven should not be used when
precise and accurate measurements are needed.

◦

Forced draft ovens have the least temperature dif-
ferential across the interior of all ovens, usually not
greater than 1
C. Air is circulated by a fan that forces
air movement throughout the oven cavity. Forced draft
ovens with air distribution manifolds appear to have

◦

90

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

added beneﬁt where air movement is horizontal across
shelving. Thus, no matter whether the oven shelves
are ﬁlled completely with moisture pans or only half
ﬁlled, the result would be the same for a particular
sample. This has been demonstrated using a Lab-
Line oven (Melrose Park, IL) in which three stacking
conﬁgurations for the pans were used (10). In one con-
ﬁguration, the oven shelves were ﬁlled with as many
pans holding 2–3 g of Cheddar cheese as the forced
draft oven could hold. In the two others, one-half of
the full load of pans with cheese was used with the
pans (1) in orderly vertical rows with the width of
one pan between rows, or (2) staggered such that pans
on every other shelf were in vertical alignment. The
results after drying showed no difference in the mean
value or the standard deviation.

Two features of some vacuum ovens contribute
to a wider temperature spread across the oven. One
feature is a glass panel in the door. Although from
an educational point of view, it may be fascinating to
observe some samples in the drying mode; the glass is
a heat sink. The second feature is the way by which air
is bled into the oven. If the air inlet and discharge are
on opposite sides, conduct of air is virtually straight
across the oven. Some newer models have air inlet
and discharge manifolds mounted top and bottom. Air
movement in this style of vacuum oven is upward
from the front and then backward to the discharge in
a broad sweep. The effect is to minimize cold spots as
well as to exhaust moisture in the interior air.

6.2.1.4 TypesofPansforOvenDrying
Methods
Pans used for moisture determinations are varied in
shape and may or may not have a cover. The AOAC
International (5) moisture pan is about 5.5 cm in diam-
eter with an insert cover. Other pans have covers that
slip over the outside edge of the pan. These pans,
while reusable, are expensive, in terms of labor costs
to clean appropriately to allow reuse.

Pan covers are necessary to control loss of sample
by spattering during the heating process. If the cover
is metal, it must be slipped to one side during drying
to allow for moisture evaporation. However, this slip-
ping of the cover also creates an area where spattering
will result in product loss. Examine the interior of most
moisture ovens and you will detect odor and deposits
of burned-on residue, which, although undetected at
the time of occurrence, produce erroneous results and
large standard deviations (10).

Consider the use of disposable pans whenever
possible; then purchase glass ﬁber discs for covers.
At 5.5 cm in diameter, these covers ﬁt perfectly inside
disposable aluminum foil pans and prevent spatter-
ing while allowing the surface to breathe. Paper ﬁlter

discs foul with fat and thus do not breathe effectively.
Drying studies done on cheese using various pans
and covers have shown that fat does spatter from
pans with slipped covers, and ﬁberglass is the most
satisfactory cover.

6.2.1.5 HandlingandPreparationofPans
The preparation and handling of pans before use
requires consideration. Use only tongs to handle any
pan. Even ﬁngerprints have weight. All pans must
be oven treated to prepare them for use. This is a factor
of major importance unless disproved by the technol-
ogist doing moisture determinations with a particular
type of pan. Disposable aluminum pans must be vac-
uum oven dried for 3 h before use. At 3 and 15 h in
either a vacuum or forced draft oven at 100
C, pans
varied in their weight within the error of the balance or
0.0001 g (10). Store dried moisture pans in a function-
ing desiccator. The glass ﬁber covers should be dried
for 1 h before use.

◦

6.2.1.6 ControlofSurfaceCrustFormation
(SandPanTechnique)
Some food materials tend to form a semipermeable
crust or lump together during drying, which will con-
tribute to erratic and erroneous results. To control this
problem, analysts use the sand pan technique. Clean,
dry sand and a short glass stirring rod are preweighed
into a moisture pan. Subsequently, after weighing in
a sample, the sand and sample are admixed with the
stirring rod left in the pan. The remainder of the pro-
cedure follows a standardized method if available;
otherwise the sample is dried to constant weight. The
purpose of the sand is twofold: to prevent surface
crust from forming and to disperse the sample so
evaporation of moisture is less impeded. The amount
of sand used is a function of sample size. Consider
20–30 g sand/3 g sample to obtain desired distribu-
tion in the pan. Similar to the procedure, applica-
tions, and advantages of using sand, other heat-stable
inert materials such as diatomaceous earth can be
used in moisture determinations, especially for sticky
fruits.

The inert matrices such as sand and diatomaceous
earth function to disperse the food constituents and
minimize the retention of moisture in the food prod-
ucts. However, the analyst must ascertain that the inert
matrix used does not give erroneous results for the
assay because of decomposition or entrapped mois-
ture loss. Test the sand or other inert matrix for weight
loss before using in any method. Add approximately
25 g of sand into a moisture pan and heat at 100˚C for
2 h and weigh to 0.1 mg. Add 5 ml of water and mix

Chapter 6 • Moisture and Total Solids Analysis

91

with the matrix using a glass rod. Heat dish, matrix,
cover, and glass rod for at least 4 h at 100
C, reweigh.
The difference between weighing must be less than
0.5 mg for any suitable matrix (12).

◦

6.2.1.7 Calculations
Moisture and total solids contents of foods can be
calculated as follows using oven drying procedures:
%Moisture (wt/wt) = wt H2O in sample
wt of wet sample

× 100

[2]

An alternative to selecting a time period for dry-
ing is to weigh and reweigh the dried sample and
pan until two successive weighings taken 30 min apart
agree within a speciﬁed limit, for example, 0.1–0.2 mg
for a 5-g sample. The user of this second method must
be aware of sample transformation, such as brown-
ing which suggests moisture loss of the wrong form.
Lipid oxidation and a resulting sample weight gain
can occur at high temperatures in a forced draft oven.
Samples high in carbohydrates should not be dried in
a forced draft oven but rather in a vacuum oven at a
temperature no higher than 70

C.

◦

%Moisture (wt/wt)

= wt of wet sample − wt of dry sample
%Total solids (wt/wt) = wt of dry sample
wt of wet sample

wt of wet sample

× 100 [3]
× 100 [4]

6.2.2 Forced Draft Oven
When using a forced draft oven, the sample is rapidly
weighed into a predried moisture pan covered and
placed in the oven for an arbitrarily selected time if no
standardized method exists. Drying time periods for
this method are 0.75–24 h (Table 6-2), depending on the
food sample and its pretreatment; some liquid samples
are dried initially on a steam bath at 100˚C to minimize
spattering. In these cases, drying times are shortened
to 0.75–3 h. A forced draft oven is used with or with-
out a steam table predrying treatment to determine the
solids content of ﬂuid milks (AOAC Method 990.19,
990.20).

6.2.3 Vacuum Oven
By drying under reduced pressure (25–100 mm Hg),
one is able to obtain a more complete removal of water
and volatiles without decomposition within a 3–6-h
drying time. Vacuum ovens need a dry air purge in
addition to temperature and vacuum controls to oper-
ate within method deﬁnition. In older methods, a
vacuum ﬂask is used, partially ﬁlled with concentrated
sulfuric acid as the desiccant. One or two air bub-
bles per second are passed through the acid. Recent
changes now stipulate an air trap that is ﬁlled with cal-
cium sulfate containing an indicator to show moisture
saturation. Between the trap and the vacuum oven is
an appropriately sized rotameter to measure air ﬂow
(100–120 ml/min) into the oven.

The following are important points in the use of a

vacuum drying oven:

6-2
table

Product

Forced Draft Oven Temperature and Times for Selected Foods

Dryon

SteamBath

Oven
Temperature
(◦C± 2)

Timein
Oven(h)

Buttermilk, liquid
Cheese, natural type only
Chocolate and cocoa
Cottage cheese
Cream, liquid and frozen
Egg albumin, liquid
Egg albumin, dried
Ice cream and frozen desserts
Milk

Whole, low fat, and skim
Condensed skim

Nuts: almonds, peanuts, walnuts

Xa

X
X
X
X
X

100
100
100
100
100
130
100
100
100
100
100
130

3

16.5 ± 0.5

3
3
3

0.75
0.75
3.5
3
3
3
3

From (6) p. 492, with permission. Copyright 2004 by the American Public Health Association,
Washington, DC.
aX = samples must be partially dried on steam bath before being placed in oven.

92

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

◦

1. Temperature used depends on the product,
such as 70
C for fruits and other high-sugar
products. Even with reduced temperature,
there can be some decomposition.

2. If the product to be assayed has a high concen-
tration of volatiles, you should consider the use
of a correction factor to compensate for the loss.
3. Analysts should remember that in a vacuum,
heat is not conducted well. Thus pans must be
placed directly on the metal shelves to conduct
heat.

4. Evaporation is an endothermic process; thus,
a pronounced cooling is observed. Because of
the cooling effect of evaporation, when several
samples are placed in an oven of this type, you
will note that the temperature will drop. Do
not attempt to compensate for the cooling effect
by increasing the temperature, otherwise sam-
ples during the last stages of drying will be
overheated.

5. The drying time is a function of the total mois-
ture present, nature of the food, surface area
per unit weight of sample, whether sand is
used as a dispersant, and the relative concentra-
tion of sugars and other substances capable of
retaining moisture or decomposing. The drying
interval is determined experimentally to give
reproducible results.

6.2.4 Microwave Analyzer
Determination of moisture in food products has
traditionally been done using a standard oven, which,
though accurate, can take many hours to dry a sam-
ple. Other methods have been developed over the
years including infrared and various types of instru-
ments that utilize halogen lamps or ceramic heating
elements. They were often used for “spot checking”
because of their speed, but they lacked the accuracy
of the standard oven method. The introduction of
microwave moisture/solids analyzers in the late 1970s
gave laboratories the accuracy they needed and the
speed they wanted. Microwave moisture analysis,
often called microwave drying, was the ﬁrst precise
and rapid technique that allowed some segments of
the food industry to make in-process adjustment of the
moisture content in food products before ﬁnal pack-
aging. For example, processed cheese could be ana-
lyzed and the composition adjusted before the blend
was dumped from the cooker. The ability to adjust
the composition of a product in-process helps food
manufacturers reduce production costs, meet regula-
tory requirements, and ensure product consistency.
Such control could effectively pay for the microwave
analyzer within a few months.

A particular microwave moisture/solids analyzer
(CEM Corporation, Matthews, NC), or equivalent,
is speciﬁed in the AOAC International procedures
for total solids analysis of processed tomato products
(AOAC Method 985.26) and moisture analysis of meat
and poultry products (AOAC Method 985.14).

The general procedure for use of a microwave
moisture/solids analyzer has been to set the micro-
processor controller to a percentage of full power
to control the microwave output. Power settings are
dependent upon the type of sample and the recom-
mendations of the manufacturer of the microwave
moisture analyzer. Next, the internal balance is tared
with two sample pads on the balance. As rapidly as
possible, a sample is placed between the two pads,
then pads are centered on the pedestal, and weighed
against the tare weight. Time for the drying opera-
tion is set by the operator and “start” is activated.
The microprocessor controls the drying procedure,
with percentage moisture indicated in the controller
window. Some newer models of microwave moisture
analyzers have a temperature control feature to pre-
cisely control the drying process, removing the need to
guess appropriate time and power settings for speciﬁc
applications. These new models also have a smaller
cavity that allows the microwave energy to be focused
directly on the sample.

There are some considerations when using a
microwave analyzer for moisture determination: (1)
the sample must be of a uniform, appropriate size
to provide for complete drying under the conditions
speciﬁed; (2) the sample must be centrally located
and evenly distributed, so some portions are not
burned and other areas are underprocessed; and (3)
the amount of time used to place an appropriate sam-
ple weight between the pads must be minimized to
prevent moisture loss or gain before weight deter-
mination. Sample pads also should be considered.
There are several different types, including ﬁberglass
and quartz ﬁber pads. For optimum results, the pads
should not absorb microwave energy, as this can cause
the sample to burn, nor should they fray easily, as this
causes them to lose weight and can affect the analysis.
In addition, they should absorb liquids well.

Another style of microwave oven that includes a
vacuum system is used in some food plants. This vac-
uum microwave oven will accommodate one sample
in triplicate or three different samples at one time. In
10 min, the results are reported to be similar to 5 h
in a vacuum oven at 100
C. The vacuum microwave
oven is not nearly as widely used as conventional
microwave analyzers, but can be beneﬁcial in some
applications.

◦

Microwave drying provides a fast,

accurate
method to analyze many foods for moisture content.
The method is sufﬁciently accurate for routine assay.

Chapter 6 • Moisture and Total Solids Analysis

93

The distinct advantage of rapid analysis far outweighs
its limitation of testing only single samples (13).

6.2.5 Infrared Drying
Infrared drying involves penetration of heat into the
sample being dried, as compared with heat conduc-
tivity and convection with conventional ovens. Such
heat penetration to evaporate moisture from the sam-
ple can signiﬁcantly shorten the required drying time
to 10–25 min. The infrared lamp used to supply heat
to the sample results in a ﬁlament temperature of
2000–2500 K (degrees Kelvin). Factors that must be
controlled include distance of the infrared source from
the dried material and thickness of the sample. The
analyst must be careful that the sample does not burn
or case harden while drying. Infrared drying ovens
may be equipped with forced ventilation to remove
moisture air and an analytical balance to read moisture
content directly. No infrared drying moisture analysis
techniques are approved by AOAC International cur-
rently. However, because of the speed of analysis, this
technique is suited for qualitative in-process use.

6.2.6 Rapid Moisture Analyzer Technology
Many rapid moisture/solids analyzers are available
to the food industry. In addition to those based on
infrared and microwave drying as described previ-
ously, compact instruments that depend on high heat
are available, such as analyzers that detect moisture
levels from 50 ppm to 100% using sample weights
of 150 mg to 40 g (e.g., Computrac R(cid:2)
, Arizona Instru-
ment LLC, Chandler, AZ). Using a digital balance, the
test sample is placed on an aluminum pan or ﬁlter
paper and the heat control program (with a heating
range of 25–275
C) elevates the test sample to a con-
stant temperature. As the moisture is driven from
the sample, the instrument automatically weighs and
calculates the percentage moisture or solids. This tech-
nology is utilized to cover a wide range of applications
within the food industry and offers quick and accurate
results within minutes. These analyzers are utilized
for both production and laboratory use with results
comparable to reference methods.

◦

6.3 DISTILLATION PROCEDURES

6.3.1 Overview
Distillation techniques involve codistilling the mois-
ture in a food sample with a high boiling point solvent
that is immiscible in water, collecting the mixture that
distills off, and then measuring the volume of water.

Two distillation procedures are in use today: direct
and reﬂux distillations, with a variety of solvents.
For example, in direct distillation with immiscible sol-
vents of higher boiling point than water, the sample is
heated in mineral oil or liquid with a ﬂash point well
above the boiling point for water. Other immiscible liq-
uids with boiling point only slightly above water can
be used (e.g., toluene, xylene, and benzene). However,
reﬂux distillation with the immiscible solvent toluene
is the most widely used method.

Distillation techniques were originally developed
as rapid methods for quality control work, but they
are not adaptable to routine testing. The distillation
method is an AOAC-approved technique for mois-
ture analysis of spices (AOAC Method 986.21), cheese
(AOAC Method 969.19), and animal feeds (AOAC
Method 925.04). It also can give good accuracy and
precision for nuts, oils, soaps, and waxes.

Distillation methods cause less thermal decompo-
sition of some foods than oven drying at high temper-
atures. Adverse chemical reactions are not eliminated
but can be minimized by using a solvent with a lower
boiling point. This, however, will increase distillation
times. Water is measured directly in the distillation
procedure (rather than by weight loss), but reading
the volume of water in a receiving tube may be less
accurate than using a weight measurement.

6.3.2 Reﬂux Distillation with Immiscible
Solvent
Reﬂux distillation uses either a solvent less dense than
water (e.g., toluene, with a boiling point of 110.6
C; or
xylene, with a boiling range of 137–140
C) or a solvent
more dense than water (e.g., tetrachlorethylene, with
a boiling point of 121
C). The advantage of using this
last solvent is that material to be dried ﬂoats; therefore
it will not char or burn. In addition, there is no ﬁre
hazard with this solvent.

◦

◦

◦

A Bidwell–Sterling moisture trap (Fig. 6-2) is
commonly used as part of the apparatus for reﬂux
distillation with a solvent less dense than water. The
distillation procedure using such a trap is described
in Fig. 6-3, with emphasis placed on dislodging adher-
ing water drops, thereby minimizing error. When the
toluene in the distillation just starts to boil, the ana-
lyst will observe a hazy cloud rising in the distillation
ﬂask. This is a vaporous emulsion of water in toluene.
Condensation occurs as the vapors rise, heating the
vessel, the Bidwell–Sterling trap, and the bottom of the
condenser. It is also hazy at the cold surface of the con-
denser, where water droplets are visible. The emulsion
inverts and becomes toluene dispersed in water. This
turbidity clears very slowly on cooling.

94

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

REFLUX DISTILLATION 

Place sample in distillation flask and cover completely with

solvent. 

⇓

Fill the receiving tube (e.g., Bidwell-Sterling Trap) with solvent,

by pouring it through the top of the condenser. 

⇓

Bring to a boil and distill slowly at first then at increased rate. 

⇓

After the distillation has proceeded for approximately 1 hr, use an

adapted buret brush to dislodge moisture droplets from the

condenser and top part of the Bidwell-Sterling trap. 

⇓

Slide the brush up the condenser to a point above the vapor

condensing area.

⇓

Rinse the brush and wire with a small amount of toluene to

dislodge adhering water drops.

⇓

If water has adhered to the walls of the calibrated tube, invert the

brush and use the straight wire to dislodge this water so it

collects in the  bottom of the tube. 

⇓

Return the wire to a point above the condensation point, and

rinse with another small amount of toluene. 

⇓

After no more water has distilled from the sample, repeat the
brush and wire routine to dislodge adhering water droplets. 

⇓

Rinse the brush and wire with toluene before removing from the

condenser. 

⇓

Allow the apparatus to cool to ambient temperatures before

measuring the volume of water in the trap. 

⇓

Volume of water x 2 (for a 50 g sample) = % moisture 

6-3
f i g u r e

Procedures for reﬂux distillation with toluene
using a Bidwell–Sterling trap. Steps to dis-
lodge adhering moisture drops are given.

of choice for determination of water in many low-
moisture foods such as dried fruits and vegeta-
bles (AOAC Method 967.19 E-G), candies, chocolate
(AOAC Method 977.10), roasted coffee, oils and fats
(AOAC Method 984.20), or any low-moisture food
high in sugar or protein. The method is quite rapid,
is accurate, and uses no heat. This method is based on
the fundamental reaction described by Bunsen in 1853
(14) involving the reduction of iodine by SO2 in the
presence of water:

2H2O + SO2 + I2 → C5H2SO4 + 2HI

[5]

This was modiﬁed to include methanol and pyridine
in a four-component system to dissolve the iodine and
SO2:
C5H5N · I2 + C5H5N · SO2 + C5H5N + H2O

→ 2C5H5N · HI + C5H5N · SO3

C5H5N · SO3 + CH3OH → C5H5N(H)SO4 · CH3

[6]
[7]

6-2
f i g u r e

Apparatus for reﬂux distillation of moisture
from a food. Key to this setup is the Bidwell–
Sterling moisture trap. This style can be used
only where the solvent is less dense than water.

Three potential sources of error with distillation

should be eliminated if observed:

1. Formation of emulsions that will not break.
Usually this can be controlled by allowing the
apparatus to cool after distillation is completed
and before reading the amount of moisture in
the trap.

2. Clinging of water droplets to dirty apparatus.
Clean glassware is essential, but water seems
to cling even with the best cleaning effort.
A burette brush, with the handle end ﬂattened
so it will pass down the condenser, is needed to
dislodge moisture droplets.

3. Decomposition of the sample with produc-
tion of water. This is principally due to car-
bohydrate decomposition to generate water
(C6H12O6 → 6H2O + 6C). If this is a measur-
able problem, discontinue method use and ﬁnd
an alternative procedure.

6.4 CHEMICAL METHOD: KARL FISCHER
TITRATION

The Karl Fischer titration is particularly adaptable
to food products that show erratic results when
heated or submitted to a vacuum. This is the method

Chapter 6 • Moisture and Total Solids Analysis

95

6-4
f i g u r e

Manual Karl Fischer titration unit. (Courtesy of
Lab Industries, Inc., Berkeley, CA.)

6-5
f i g u r e

Automated Karl Fischer volumetric titration
unit. (Courtesy of Mettler-Toledo, Columbus,
OH.)

These reactions show that for each mole of water, 1 mol
of iodine, 1 mol of SO2, 3 mol of pyridine, and 1 mol
of methanol are used. For general work, a methano-
lic solution is used that contains these components in
the ratio of 1 iodine:3 SO2:10 pyridine, and at a con-
centration so that 3.5 mg of water = 1 ml of reagent.
A procedure for standardizing this reagent is given
below.

In a volumetric titration procedure (Fig. 6-4 is
manual titration unit; Fig. 6-5 is example of automated
titration unit), iodine and SO2 in the appropriate form
are added to the sample in a closed chamber protected
from atmospheric moisture. The excess of I2 that can-
not react with the water can be determined visually.
The endpoint color is dark red-brown. Some instru-
mental systems are improved by the inclusion of a
potentiometer (i.e., conductometric method) to elec-
tronically determine the endpoint, which increases the
sensitivity and accuracy. The volumetric titration can
be done manually (Fig. 6-4) or with an automated unit
(Fig. 6-5 is one example instrument). The automated
volumetric titration units (used for 100 ppm water to
very high concentrations) use a pump for mechanical
addition of titrant and use the conductometric method
for endpoint determination (i.e., detection of excess
iodine is by applying a current and measuring the
potential).

The volumetric titration procedure described
above is appropriate for samples with a moisture
content greater than ∼0.03%. A second type of titra-
tion, referred to as coulometric titration, is ideal for
products with very low levels of moisture, from 0.03%
down to parts per million (ppm) levels. In this method,
iodine is electrolytically generated (2I → I2 + 2e
−) to
titrate the moisture. The amount of iodine required
to titrate the moisture is determined by the current
needed to generate the iodine. Just like for volumet-
ric titration, automated coulometric titration units are
available commercially.

In a Karl Fischer volumetric titration, the Karl Fis-
cher reagent (KFR) is added directly as the titrant if the
moisture in the sample is accessible. However, if mois-
ture in a solid sample is inaccessible to the reagent,
the moisture is extracted from the food with an appro-
priate solvent (e.g., methanol). (Particle size affects
efﬁciency of extraction directly.) Then the methanol
extract is titrated with KFR.

The obnoxious odor of pyridine makes it an
researchers have
undesirable reagent. Therefore,
experimented with other amines capable of dissolving
iodine and sulfur dioxide. Some aliphatic amines and
several other heterocyclic compounds were found
suitable. On the basis of these new amines, one-
component reagents (solvent and titrant components

96

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

together) and two-component reagents (solvent and
titrant components separate) have been prepared.
The one-component reagent may be more convenient
to use, but the two-component reagent has greater
storage stability.

Before the amount of water found in a food
sample can be determined, a KFR water (moisture)
equivalence (KFReq) must be determined. The KFReq
value represents the equivalent amount of moisture
that reacts with 1 ml of KFR. Standardization must
be checked before each use because the KFReq will
change with time.

The KFReq can be established with pure water,
a water-in-methanol standard, or sodium tartrate
dihydrate. Pure water is a difﬁcult standard to use
because of inaccuracy in measuring the small amounts
required. The water-in-methanol standard is pre-
mixed by the manufacturer and generally contains
1 mg of water/ml of solution. This standard can
change over prolonged storage periods by absorb-
ing atmospheric moisture. Sodium tartrate dihydrate
(Na2C4H4O6·2H2O) is a primary standard for deter-
mining KFReq. This compound is very stable, contains
15.66% water under all conditions expected in the
laboratory, and is the material of choice to use.

The KFReq is calculated as follows using sodium

tartrate dihydrate:

KFReq (mg H2O/ml)
= 36 g H2O/mol Na2C4H4O6 · 2H2O × S × 1000

230.08 g/mol × A

[8]

where:
KFReq = Karl Fischer reagent moisture equivalence

S = weight of sodium tartrate dihydrate (g)
A = ml of KFR required for titration of sodium

tartrate dehydrate

Once the KFReq is known, the moisture content of

the sample is determined as follows:

%H2O = KFReq × Ks

S

× 100

[9]

where:

KFReq = Karl Fischer reagent water (moisture)

equivalence

Ks = ml of KFR used to titrate sample
S = weight of sample (mg)

The major difﬁculties and sources of error in the

Karl Fischer titration methods are as follows:

1. Incomplete moisture extraction. For this rea-
son, ﬁneness of grind (i.e., particle size) is

important in preparation of cereal grains and
some foods.

2. Atmospheric moisture. External air must not

be allowed to inﬁltrate the reaction chamber.

3. Moisture adhering to walls of unit. All glass-

ware and utensils must be carefully dried.

4. Interferences from certain food constituents.
Ascorbic acid is oxidized by KFR to dehy-
droascorbic acid to overestimate moisture con-
tent; carbonyl compounds react with methanol
to form acetals and release water to overesti-
mate moisture content (this reaction also may
result in fading endpoints); unsaturated fatty
acids will react with iodine, so moisture content
will be overestimated.

6.5 PHYSICAL METHODS

6.5.1 Dielectric Method
The electrical properties of water are used in the
dielectric method to determine the moisture content
of certain foods, by measuring the change in capac-
itance or resistance to an electric current passed
through a sample. These instruments require calibra-
tion against samples of known moisture content as
determined by standard methods. Sample density or
weight/volume relationships and sample temperature
are important factors to control in making reliable and
repeatable measurements by dielectric methods. These
techniques can be very useful for process control mea-
surement applications, where continuous measure-
ment is required. These methods are limited to food
systems that contain no more than 30–35% moisture.

◦

The moisture determination in dielectric-type
meters is based on the fact that the dielectric constant
of water (80.37 at 20
C) is higher than that of most sol-
vents. The dielectric constant is measured as an index
of capacitance. As an example, the dielectric method
is used widely for cereal grains. Its use is based on
the fact that water has a dielectric constant of 80.37,
whereas starches and proteins found in cereals have
dielectric constants of 10. By determining this properly
on samples in standard metal condensers, dial read-
ings may be obtained and the percentage of moisture
determined from a previously constructed standard
curve for a particular cereal grain.

6.5.2 Hydrometry
Hydrometry is the science of measuring speciﬁc grav-
ity or density, which can be done using several dif-
ferent principles and instruments. While hydrometry
is considered archaic in some analytical circles, it is
still widely used and, with proper technique, is highly

Chapter 6 • Moisture and Total Solids Analysis

97

accurate. Speciﬁc gravity measurements with various
types of hydrometers or with a pycnometer are com-
monly used for routine testing of moisture (or solids)
content of numerous food products. These include
beverages, salt brines, and sugar solutions. Speciﬁc
gravity measurements are best applied to the analysis
of solutions consisting of only one solute in a medium
of water.

6.5.2.1 Hydrometer
A second approach to measuring speciﬁc gravity is
based on Archimedes’ principle, which states that a
solid suspended in a liquid will be buoyed by a force
equal to the weight of the liquid displaced. The weight
per unit volume of a liquid is determined by mea-
suring the volume displaced by an object of standard
weight. A hydrometer is a standard weight on the
end of a spindle, and it displaces a weight of liquid
equal to its own weight (Fig. 6-6). For example, in a
liquid of low density, the hydrometer will sink to a
greater depth, whereas in a liquid of high density, the
hydrometer will not sink as far. Hydrometers are avail-
able in narrow and wide ranges of speciﬁc gravity.
The spindle of the hydrometer is calibrated to read

6-6
f i g u r e

Hydrometers. (Courtesy of Cole-Parmer Instru-
ment Company, Vernon Hills, IL.)

◦

C. A hydrome-
speciﬁc gravity directly at 15.5 or 20
ter is not as accurate as a pycnometer, but the speed
with which you can do an analysis is a decisive fac-
tor. The accuracy of speciﬁc gravity measurements can
be improved by using a hydrometer calibrated in the
desired range of speciﬁc gravities.

The rudimentary but surprisingly accurate hydro-
meter comes equipped with various modiﬁcations
depending on the ﬂuid to be measured:

1. The Quevenne and New York Board of Health
lactometer is used to determine the density of
milk. The Quevenne lactometer reads from 15
to 40 lactometer units and corresponds to 1.015
to 1.040 speciﬁc gravity. For every degree above
60
F, 0.1 lactometer unit is added to the read-
ing, and 0.1 lactometer unit is subtracted for
every degree below 60

F.

◦

◦

2. The Baumé hydrometer was used originally to
determine the density of salt solutions (origi-
nally 10% salt), but it has come into much wider
use. From the value obtained in the Baumé
scale, you can convert to speciﬁc gravity of liq-
uids heavier than water. For example, it is used
to determine the speciﬁc gravity of milk being
condensed in a vacuum pan.

3. The Brix hydrometer is a type of saccharome-
ter used for sugar solutions such as fruit juices
and syrups and one usually reads directly the
percentage of sucrose at 20
C. Balling saccha-
rometers are graduated to indicate percentage
of sugar by weight at 60
F. The terms Brix and
Balling are interpreted as the weight percent-
age of pure sucrose.

◦

◦

4. Alcoholometers are used to estimate the alco-
hol content of beverages. Such hydrometers
are calibrated in 0.1 or 0.2
proof to determine
the percentage of alcohol in distilled liquors
(AOAC Method 957.03).

◦

5. The Twaddell hydrometer is only for liquids

heavier than water.

6.5.2.2 Pycnometer
One approach to measuring speciﬁc gravity is a com-
parison of the weights of equal volumes of a liquid
and water in standardized glassware, a pycnometer
(Fig. 6-7). This will yield density of the liquid com-
pared to water. In some texts and reference books,
20/20 is given after the speciﬁc gravity number. This
indicates that the temperature of both ﬂuids was 20
C
when the weights were measured. Using a clean, dry
pycnometer at 20
C, the analyst weighs it empty, ﬁlls it
to the full point with distilled water at 20
C, inserts the
thermometer to seal the ﬁll opening, and then touches
off the last drops of water and puts on the cap for the
overﬂow tube. The pycnometer is wiped dry in case of

◦

◦

◦

98

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

used to describe the nature of the food. While some
refractometers are designed only to provide results
as refractive indices, others, particularly hand-held,
quick-to-use units, are equipped with scales calibrated
to read the percentage of solids, percentage of sugars,
and the like, depending on the products for which they
are intended. Tables are provided with the instruments
to convert values and adjust for temperature differ-
ences. Refractometers are used not just on the labora-
tory bench or as hand-held units. Refractometers can
be installed in a liquid processing line to monitor the
˚Brix of products such as carbonated soft drinks, dis-
solved solids in orange juice, and the percentage of
solids in milk (15).

When a beam of light is passed from one medium
to another and the density of the two differs, then the
beam of light is bent or refracted. Bending of the light
beam is a function of the media and the sines of the
angles of incidence and refraction at any given tem-
perature and pressure and is thus a constant (Fig. 6-8).
The (RI) (η) is a ratio of the sines of the angles:

η = sine incident ray angle
sine refracted ray angle

[11]

All chemical compounds have an index of refrac-
tion. Therefore, this measurement can be used for the
qualitative identiﬁcation of an unknown compound
by comparing its RI with literature values. RI varies
with concentration of the compound, temperature,
and wavelength of light. Instruments are designed
to give a reading by passing a light beam of a spe-
ciﬁc wavelength through a glass prism into a liquid,
the sample. Bench-top or hand-held units use Amici
prisms to obtain the D line of the sodium spectrum or

6-8
f i g u r e

Reﬂection
refractometry.

and

refraction

concepts

of

Pycnometer.

6-7
f i g u r e

any spillage from ﬁlling and is reweighed. The density
of the sample is calculated as follows:

weight of sample-ﬁlled pycnometer

−weight of empty pycnometer
weight of water-ﬁlled pycnometer
−weight of empty pycnometer
= density of sample

[10]

This method is used for determining alcohol con-
tent
in alcoholic beverages (e.g., distilled liquor,
AOAC Method 930.17), solids in sugar syrups (AOAC
Method 932.14B), and solids in milk (AOAC Method
925.22).

6.5.3 Refractometry
Moisture in liquid sugar products and condensed
milks can be determined using a Baumé hydrometer
(solids), a Brix hydrometer (sugar content), gravimet-
ric means, or a refractometer. If it is performed cor-
rectly and no crystalline solids are evident, the refrac-
tometer procedure is rapid and surprisingly accurate
(AOAC Method 9.32.14C, for solids in syrups). The
refractometer has been valuable in determining the
soluble solids in fruits and fruit products (AOAC
Method 932.12; 976.20; 983.17).

The refractive index (RI) of an oil, syrup, or
other liquid is a dimensionless constant that can be

Chapter 6 • Moisture and Total Solids Analysis

99

589 nm from white light. Whenever refractive indices
of standard ﬂuids are given, these are prefaced with
η20
D = a value from 1.3000 to 1.7000. The Greek letter η
is the symbol for RI; the 20 refers to temperature in
C;
and D is the wavelength of the light beam, the D line
of the sodium spectrum.

◦

Bench-top instruments are more accurate com-
pared with hand-held units mainly because of
temperature control (Fig. 6-9). These former units have
provisions for water circulation through the head
where the prism and sample meet. Abbe refractome-
ters are the most popular for laboratory use. Care must
be taken when cleaning the prism surface following
use. Wipe the contact surface clean with lens paper
and rinse with distilled water and then ethanol. Close
the prism chamber and cover the instrument with a
bag when not in use to protect the delicate prism
surface from dust or other debris that might lead to
scratches and inaccuracy.

The fact that the RI of a solution increases with
concentration has been exploited in the analysis of
total soluble solids of carbohydrate-based foods such
as sugar syrups, fruit products, and tomato prod-
ucts. Because of this use,
these refractometers are
calibrated in
Brix (g of sucrose/100 g of sample),
which is equivalent to percentage sucrose on a wt/wt
basis. Refractive index measurements are used widely
to approximate sugar concentration in foods, even
though values are accurate only for pure sucrose
solutions.

◦

6.5.4 Infrared Analysis
Infrared spectroscopy (see Chap. 23) has attained a
primary position in monitoring the composition of
food products before, during, and following process-
ing (16). It has a wide range of food applications and
has proven successful in the laboratory, at-line, and
on-line. Infrared spectroscopy measures the absorp-
tion of radiation (near- or mid-infrared) by molecules
in foods. Different frequencies of infrared radiation are
absorbed by different functional groups characteristic
of the molecules in food. Similar to the use of ultravi-
olet (UV) or visible (Vis) light in UV–Vis spectroscopy,
a sample is irradiated with a wavelength of infrared
light speciﬁc for the constituent to be measured. The
concentration of that constituent is determined by
measuring the energy that is reﬂected or transmitted
by the sample, which is inversely proportional to the
energy absorbed. Infrared spectrometers must be cali-
brated for each analyte to be measured and the analyte
must be uniformly distributed in the sample.

For water, near-infrared (NIR) bands (1400–1450;
1920–1950 nm) are characteristic of the –OH stretch

6-9
f i g u r e

Rhino Brix hand-held refractometer, R2 mini
digital hand-held refractometer, and Mark
III Abbe refractometer. (Courtesy of Reichert
Analytical Instrument, Depew, NY.)

100

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

of the water molecule and can be used to deter-
mine the moisture content of a food. NIR has been
applied to moisture analysis of a wide variety of food
commodities.

The use of mid-infrared milk analyzers to deter-
mine fat, protein,
lactose, and total solids in milk
(AOAC Method 972.16) is covered in Chap. 23. The
midrange spectroscopic method does not yield mois-
ture or solids results except by computer calculation
because these instruments do not monitor at wave-
lengths where water absorbs. The instrument must be
calibrated using a minimum of eight milk samples that
were previously analyzed for fat (F), protein (P), lac-
tose (L), and total solids (TS) by standard methods.
Then, a mean difference value, a, is calculated for all
samples used in calibration:

a = Σ(TS − F − P − L)/n

◦

◦

◦

−

C and −0.541

C (−0.525 and −0.565

with any decrease in the synthesis of lactose, there is
a compensating increase in the concentrations of Na+
and Cl
. While termed a physical constant, the freez-
ing point varies within narrow limits, and the vast
majority of samples from individual cows fall between
−0.503
H, tem-
perature in
H or Hortvet, the surname of the inventor
of the ﬁrst freezing point apparatus). The average is
very close to −0.517
H). Herd or bulk milk
will exhibit a narrower range unless the supply was
watered intentionally or accidentally or if the milk is
from an area where severe drought has existed. All val-
ues today are given in
C by agreement. The following
◦
is used to convert

C (−0.540

◦
H to

H (5, 6):

C, or

◦

◦

◦

◦

◦

C = 0.9623

◦

◦

C to

◦
H − 0.0024
◦
C + 0.0025

[14]

[15]

[12]

◦

H = 1.03916

where:

a = solids not measurable by the F, P, and L

methods

n = number of samples
F = fat percentage
P = protein percentage
L = lactose percentage
TS = total solids percentage

Total solids then can be determined from any

infrared milk analyzer results by using the formula

TS = a + F + P + L

[13]

The a value is thus a standard value mathematically
derived. Newer instruments have the algorithm in
their computer software to ascertain this value auto-
matically. Moreover, Fourier transform infrared spec-
troscopy (FTIR) is the latest development that allows
greater ﬂexibility in infrared assays.

6.5.5 Freezing Point
When water is added to a food product, many of
the physical constants are altered. Some properties of
solutions depend on the number of solute particles as
ions or molecules present. These properties are vapor
pressure, freezing point, boiling point, and osmotic
pressure. Measurement of any of these properties can
be used to determine the concentration of solutes in
a solution. However, the most commonly practiced
assay for milk is the change of the freezing point value.
It has economic importance with regard to both raw
and pasteurized milk. The freezing point of milk is its
most constant physical property. The secretory process
of the mammary gland is such that the osmotic pres-
sure is kept in equilibrium with blood and milk. Thus,

The principal utility of freezing point is to mea-
sure for added water. However, the freezing point of
milk can be altered by mastitis infection in cows and
souring of milk. In special cases, nutrition and envi-
ronment of the cow, stage of lactation, and processing
operations for the milk can affect the freezing point.
If the solute remains constant in weight and composi-
tion, the change of the freezing point varies inversely
with the amount of solvent present. Therefore, we can
calculate the percent H2O added:

%H2O added = 0.517 − T

0.517

× 100

[16]

where:

0.517 = freezing point in

a plant

T = freezing point in

◦

◦

C of all milk entering

C of a sample

◦

◦

C (−0.550
◦
C (−0.525

The AOAC Method 961.07 for water added to
milk uses a cryoscope to test for freezing points,
and assumes a freezing point for normal milk of
−0.527
H). The Food and Drug Adminis-
tration will reject all milk with freezing points above
−0.503
◦
H). Since the difference between
the freezing points of milk and water is slight and
since the freezing point can be used to calculate the
amount of water added, it is essential that the method
be as precise as possible. The thermister used can sense
H). The general
temperature change to 0.001
technique is to supercool the solution and then induce
crystallization by a vibrating reed. The temperature
will rise rapidly to the freezing point or eutectic tem-
perature as the water freezes. In the case of pure water,
the temperature remains constant until all the water
is frozen. In the case of milk, the temperature is read
when there is no further temperature rise.

C (0.001

◦

◦

Chapter 6 • Moisture and Total Solids Analysis

101

There are various techniques to measure aw.
A commonly used approach relies on measuring the
amount of moisture in the equilibrated headspace
above a sample of the food product, which correlates
directly with sample aw. A sample for such analy-
sis is placed in a small closed chamber at constant
temperature, and a relative humidity sensor is used
to measure the ERH of the sample atmosphere after
equilibration. A simple and accurate variation of this
approach is the chilled mirror technique in which the
water vapor in the headspace condenses on the surface
of a mirror that is cooled in a controlled manner. The
dew point is determined by the temperature at which
condensation takes place, and this determines the rel-
ative humidity in the headspace. Two other general
approaches to measuring aw are (1) using the sample
freezing point depression and moisture content to cal-
culate aw, and (2) equilibrating a sample in a chamber
held at constant relative humidity (by means of a sat-
urated salt solution) and then using the water content
of the sample to calculate aw (17).

6.7 COMPARISON OF METHODS

6.7.1 Principles
Oven drying methods involve the removal of mois-
ture from the sample and then a weight determination
of the solids remaining to calculate the moisture con-
tent. Nonwater volatiles can be lost during drying,
but their loss is generally a negligible percentage of
the amount of water lost. Distillation procedures also
involve a separation of the moisture from the solids,
and the moisture is quantitated directly by volume.
Karl Fischer titration is based on chemical reactions of
the moisture present, reﬂected as the amount of titrant
used.

The dielectric method is based on electrical prop-
erties of water. Hydrometric methods are based on
the relationship between speciﬁc gravity and mois-
ture content. The refractive index method is based on
how water in a sample affects the refraction of light.
Near-infrared analysis of water in foods is based on
measuring the absorption at wavelengths characteris-
tic of the molecular vibration in water. Freezing point
is a physical property of milk that is changed by a
change in solute concentration.

6-10
f i g u r e

A model 4D3 advanced instruments cryo-
scope for freezing point determination in milk.
(Courtesy of Advanced Instruments, Inc., Nor-
wood, MA.)

Instrumentation available is manufactured by
Advanced Instruments (Fig. 6-10). Time required for
the automated instruments is 1–2 min per sample
using a prechilled sample.

6.6 WATER ACTIVITY

Water content alone is not a reliable indicator of food
stability, since foods with the same water content differ
in their perishability (17). This is at least partly due to
differences in the way that water associates with other
constituents in a food. Water tightly associated with
other food constituents is less available for microbial
growth and chemical reactions to cause decomposi-
tion. Water activity (aw) is a better indication of food
perishability than is water content. Water activity is
deﬁned as follows:

aw = P
Po
aw = ERH
100

[17]

[18]

where:

aw = water activity
P = partial pressure of water above the sample
Po = vapor pressure of pure water at the same

temperature (speciﬁed)

ERH = equilibrium relative humidity

surrounding the product

6.7.2 Nature of Sample
While most foods will tolerate oven drying at high
temperatures, some foods contain volatiles that are
lost at such temperatures. Some foods have con-
stituents that undergo chemical reactions at high tem-
peratures to generate or utilize moisture or other

102

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

compounds, to affect the calculated moisture content.
Vacuum oven drying at reduced temperatures may
overcome such problems for some foods. However,
a distillation technique is necessary for some food to
minimize volatilization and decomposition. For foods
very low in moisture or high in fats and sugars,
Karl Fischer titration is often the method of choice.
The use of a pycnometer, hydrometer, and refrac-
tometer requires liquid samples, ideally with limited
constituents.

6.7.3 Intended Purposes
Moisture analysis data may be needed quickly for
quality control purposes,
in which high accuracy
may not be necessary. Of the oven drying methods,
microwave drying,
infrared drying, and the mois-
ture analyzer technique are fastest. Some forced draft
oven procedures require less than 1 h drying, but
most forced draft oven and vacuum oven procedures
require a much longer time. The electrical, hydro-
metric, and refractive index methods are very rapid
but often require correlation to less empirical meth-
ods. Oven drying procedures are ofﬁcial methods for
a variety of food products. Reﬂux distillation is an
AOAC method for chocolate, dried vegetables, dried
milk, and oils and fats. Such ofﬁcial methods are used
for regulatory and nutrition labeling purposes.

6.8 SUMMARY

The moisture content of foods is important to food
processors and consumers for a variety of reasons.
While moisture determination may seem simplistic, it
is often one of the most difﬁcult assays in obtaining
accurate and precise results. The free water present in
food is generally more easily quantitated as compared
to the adsorbed moisture and the water of hydration.
Some moisture analysis methods involve a separation
of moisture in the sample from the solids and then
quantitation by weight or volume. Other methods do
not involve such a separation but instead are based
on some physical or chemical property of the water
in the sample. A major difﬁculty with many meth-
ods is attempting to remove or otherwise quantitate
all water present. This often is complicated by decom-
position or interference by other food constituents.
For each moisture analysis method, there are factors
that must be controlled or precautions that must be
taken to ensure accurate and precise results. Care-
ful sample collection and handling procedures are
extremely important and cannot be overemphasized.
The choice of moisture analysis method is often deter-
mined by the expected moisture content, nature of

other food constituents (e.g., highly volatile, heat sen-
sitive), equipment available, speed necessary, accuracy
and precision required, and intended purpose (e.g.,
regulatory or in-plant quality control).

6.9 STUDY QUESTIONS

1. Identify ﬁve factors that one would need to consider
when choosing a moisture analysis method for a speciﬁc
food product.

2. Why is standardized methodology needed for moisture

determinations?

3. What are the potential advantages of using a vacuum
oven rather than a forced draft oven for moisture content
determination?

4. In each case speciﬁed below, would you likely overes-
timate or underestimate the moisture content of a food
product being tested? Explain your answer.
(a) Forced draft oven:

present

carbohydrates

(e.g., Maillard

Sample very hygroscopic

browning)
Sucrose hydrolysis
Surface crust formation
Splattering

• Particle size too large
• High concentration of volatile ﬂavor compounds
• Lipid oxidation
•
• Alteration of
•
•
•
• Desiccator with dried sample not sealed properly
• Emulsion between water in sample and solvent
• Water clinging to condenser
• Very humid day when weighing original samples
• Glassware not dry
•
•
•

Sample ground coarsely
Food high in vitamin C
Food high in unsaturated fatty acids

not broken

(b) Toluene distillation:

(c) Karl Fischer:

5. The procedure for an analysis for moisture in a liquid
food product requires the addition of 1–2 ml of deionized
water to the weighed sample in the moisture pan. Why
should you add water to an analysis in which moisture is
being determined?

6. A new instrument based on infrared principles has been
received in your laboratory to be used in moisture anal-
ysis. Brieﬂy describe the way you would ascertain if
the new instrument would meet your satisfaction and
company standards.

7. A technician you supervise is to determine the moisture
content of a food product by the Karl Fischer method.
Your technician wants to know what is this “Karl Fischer
reagent water equivalence” that is used in the equation to
calculate percentage of moisture in the sample, why it is
necessary, and how it is determined. Give the technician
your answer.

Chapter 6 • Moisture and Total Solids Analysis

103

8. To explain and contrast the principles (not procedures)
in determining the moisture content of food products by
the following method, complete the table below. (Assume
that sample selection and handling has been done appro-
priately.)

Howis
water
removed/
reacted/
identiﬁed?

Whatis
actually
measured?

What
assumptionsare
madeintrusting
thedataobtained
(orprecautions
takentoensure
accuratedata)?

Microwave

oven

NIR
Karl Fischer
Toluene

distillation

9. You are fortunate to have available in your laboratory the
equipment for doing moisture analysis by essentially all
methods – both ofﬁcial and rapid quality control meth-
ods. For each of the food products listed below (with
the purpose speciﬁed as rapid quality control or ofﬁcial),
indicate (a) the name of the method you would use, (b)
the principle (not procedure) for the method, (c) a justi-
ﬁcation for use of that method (as compared to using a
hot air drying oven), and (d) two cautions in use of the
method to ensure accurate results.
(a) Ice cream mix (liquid) – quality control
(b) Milk chocolate – ofﬁcial
(c) Spices – ofﬁcial
(d) Syrup for canned peaches – quality control
(e) Oat ﬂour – quality control

10. You are a manufacturer of processed cheese. The maxi-
mum allowed moisture content for your product is 40%.
Your current product has a mean moisture content of 38%,
with a standard deviation of 0.7. It would be possible
to increase your mean moisture content to 39.5% if you
could reduce your standard deviation to 0.25. This would
result in a saving of $3.4 million per year. You can accom-
plish this by rapidly analyzing the moisture content of
the cheese blend prior to the cooking step of manufac-
ture. The cheese blend is prepared in a batch process, and
you have 10 min to adjust the moisture content of each
batch.
(a) Describe the rapid moisture analysis method you
would use. Include your rationale for selecting the
method.

(b) How would you ensure the accuracy and precision
of this method (you need to be sure your standard
deviation is below 0.25)?

11. You work in a milk drying plant. As part of the produc-
tion process, you need to rapidly analyze the moisture
content of condensed milk.
(a) What rapid secondary method would you use, and
what primary method would you use to calibrate

the secondary method? Additionally, how would you
ensure the accuracy and precision of your secondary
method?

(b) Your results with the secondary method are con-
sistently high (about 1%), based on the secondary
method you chose. What are some potential problems
and how would you correct them?

12. During a 12-h period, 1000 blocks (40 lbs each) from ten
different vats (100 blocks per vat) of Cheddar cheese
were produced. It was later realized that the cooking
temperature was too low during cheesemaking. You are
concerned that this might increase the moisture content
of the cheese above the legal requirement. Describe the
sampling plan and method of analysis you would use to
determine the moisture content of the cheese. You want
the results within 48 h so you can determine what to do
with the cheese.

6.10 PRACTICE PROBLEMS

1. As an analyst, you are given a sample of condensed soup
to analyze to determine if it is reduced to the correct
concentration. By gravimetric means, you ﬁnd that the
concentration is 26.54% solids. The company standard
reads 28.63%. If the starting volume were 1000 gallons at
8.67% solids and the weight is 8.5 pounds per gallon, how
much more water must be removed?

2. Your laboratory just received several sample containers
of peas to analyze for moisture content. There is a visible
condensate on the inside of the container. What is your
procedure to obtain a result?

3. You have the following gravimetric results: weight of
dried pan and glass disc is 1.0376 g, weight of pan and
liquid sample is 4.6274 g, and weight of the pan and dried
sample is 1.7321 g. What was the moisture content of the
sample and what is the percent solids?

Answers
1. The weight of the soup initially is superﬂuous infor-
mation. By condensing the soup to 26.54% solids
from 8.67% solids, the volume is reduced to 326.7 gal
[(8.67%/26.54%) × 1000 gal]. You need to reduce the vol-
ume further to obtain 28.63% solids [(8.67%/28.63%) ×
1000 gal] or 302.8 gal. The difference in the gallons
obtained is 23.9 gal (326.7 gal − 302.8 gal), or the vol-
ume of water that must be removed from the partially
condensed soup to comply with company standards.

2. This problem focuses on a real issue in the food pro-
cessing industry – when do you analyze a sample and
when don’t you? It would appear that the peas have lost
moisture that should be within the vegetable for correct
results. You will need to grind the peas in a food mill or
blender. If the peas are in a Mason jar or one that ﬁts a
blender head, no transfer is needed. Blend the peas to
a creamy texture. If a container transfer was made, then

104

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

put the blended peas back into the original container. Mix
with the residual moisture to a uniform blend. Collect
a sample for moisture analysis. You should note on the
report form containing the results of the analysis that the
pea samples had free moisture on container walls when
they arrived.

3. Note Equations [2]–[4]. To use any of the equations, you
must subtract the weight of the dried pan and glass disc.
Then you obtain 3.5898 g of original sample and 0.6945 g
when dried. By subtracting these results, you have
removed water (2.8953 g). Then (0.6945 g/3.5898 g) ×
100 = 19.35% solids and (2.8953 g/3.5898 g) × 100 =
80.65% water.

6.11 REFERENCES

1. Pomeranz Y, Meloan C (1994) Food analysis: theory and

practice, 3rd edn. Chapman & Hall, New York

2. Aurand LW, Woods AE, Wells MR (1987) Food com-
position and analysis. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New
York

3. Josyln MA (1970) Methods in food analysis, 2nd edn.

Academic, New York

4. USDA (2008) USDA Nutrient Database for Standard
Reference. Release 21, 2008. http://www.nal.usda.gov/
fnic/cgi-bin/nut_search.pl

5. AOAC International (2007) Ofﬁcial methods of analysis,
18th edn, 2005; Current through revision 2, 2007 (On-
line). AOAC International, Gaithersburg, MD

6. Wehr HM, Frank JF (eds) (2004) Standard methods for
the examination of dairy products, 17th edn. American
Public Health Association, Washington, DC

7. AACC International (2010) Approved methods of anal-
ysis, 11th edn (On-line). AACC International, St. Paul,
MN

8. Emmons DB, Bradley RL Jr, Sauvé JP, Campbell C,
Lacroix C, Jimenez-Marquez SA (2001) Variations of
moisture measurements in cheese.
J AOAC Int 84:
593–604

9. Emmons DB, Bradley RL Jr, Campbell C, Sauve JP (2001)
Movement of moisture in refrigeration cheese samples
transferred to room temperature. J AOAC Int 84:620–622
10. Bradley RL Jr, Vanderwarn MA (2001) Determination
of moisture in cheese and cheese products. J AOAC Int
84:570–592

11. Nelson OA, Hulett GA (1920) The moisture content of

cereals. J Ind Eng Chem 12:40–45

12. International Dairy Federation. Provisional Standard 4A
(1982) Cheese and processed cheese: determination of
the total solids content, Brussels, Belgium

13. Bouraoui M, Richard P, Fichtali J (1993) A review
of moisture content determination in foods using
microwave oven drying. Food Res Inst Int 26:49–57

14. Mitchell J Jr, Smith DM (1948) Aquametry. Wiley, New

York

15. Giese J (1993) In-line sensors for food processing. Food

Technol 47(5):87–95

16. WilsonRH,KemsleyEK(1992)On-lineprocessmonitoring
usinginfraredtechniques. In: Foodprocessingautomation
II. Proceedings of the American society of agricultural
engineers, ASAE Publication 02-92. American Society of
Agricultural Engineers, St. Joseph, MI

17. Damodaran S, Parkin KL, Fennema OR (2007) Water and
ice (Chapter 2). In: Fennema OR (ed) Fennema’s food
chemistry, 4rd edn. CRC, Boca Raton, FL

7

c h a p t e r

Ash Analysis

MauriceR.Marshall
DepartmentofFoodScienceandHumanNutrition,UniversityofFlorida,
Gainesville,FL32611-0370,USA
martym@uﬂ.edu

7.1 Introduction 107

7.1.1 Deﬁnitions 107
7.1.2 Importance of Ash in Food Analysis 107
7.1.3 Ash Contents in Foods 107

7.2 Methods 108

7.2.1 Sample Preparation 108

7.2.1.1 Plant Materials 108
7.2.1.2 Fat and Sugar Products 108

7.2.2 Dry Ashing 108

7.2.2.1 Principles and

Instrumentation 108

7.2.2.2 Procedures 109
7.2.2.3 Special Applications 109

7.2.3 Wet Ashing 109

7.2.3.1 Principle, Materials, and

Applications 109
7.2.3.2 Procedures 110

7.2.4 Microwave Ashing 110

7.2.4.1 Microwave Wet Ashing 111
7.2.4.2 Microwave Dry Ashing 112

7.2.5 Other Ash Measurements 112

7.3 Comparison of Methods 112
7.4 Summary 113
7.5 Study Questions 113
7.6 Practice Problems 113
7.7 Acknowledgments 114
7.8 References 114

S.S. Nielsen, Food Analysis, Food Science Texts Series, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1478-1_7,
c(cid:2) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

105

Chapter 7 • Ash Analysis

7.1 INTRODUCTION

Ash refers to the inorganic residue remaining after
either ignition or complete oxidation of organic matter
in a foodstuff. A basic knowledge of the characteristics
of various ashing procedures and types of equipment
is essential to ensure reliable results. Two major types
of ashing are used: dry ashing, primarily for proximate
composition and for some types of speciﬁc mineral
analyses; wet ashing (oxidation), as a preparation for
the analysis of certain minerals. Microwave systems
now are available for both dry and wet ashing, to
speed the processes. Most dry samples (i.e., whole
grain, cereals, dried vegetables) need no preparation,
while fresh vegetables need to be dried prior to ash-
ing. High-fat products such as meats may need to be
dried and fat extracted before ashing. The ash content
of foods can be expressed on either a wet weight (as
is) or on a dry weight basis. For general and food-
speciﬁc information on measuring ash content, see
references (1–11).

107

7.1.3 Ash Contents in Foods
The average ash content for various food groups is
given in Table 7-1. The ash content of most fresh foods
rarely is greater than 5%. Pure oils and fats generally
contain little or no ash; products such as cured bacon
may contain 6% ash, and dried beef may be as high as
11.6% (wet weight basis).

Fats, oils, and shortenings vary from 0.0 to 4.1%
ash, while dairy products vary from 0.5 to 5.1%. Fruits,
fruit juice, and melons contain 0.2–0.6% ash, while
dried fruits are higher (2.4–3.5%). Flours and meals
vary from 0.3 to 1.4% ash. Pure starch contains 0.3%
and wheat germ 4.3% ash. It would be expected that

7-1
table

FoodItem

Ash Content of Selected Foods

PercentAsh
(WetWeight

Basis)

◦

7.1.1 Deﬁnitions
Dry ashing refers to the use of a mufﬂe furnace capa-
ble of maintaining temperatures of 500–600
C. Water
and volatiles are vaporized, and organic substances
are burned in the presence of oxygen in air to CO2 and
oxides of N2. Most minerals are converted to oxides,
sulfates, phosphates, chlorides, and silicates. Elements
such as Fe, Se, Pb, and Hg may partially volatilize
with this procedure, so other methods must be used
if ashing is a preliminary step for speciﬁc elemental
analysis.

Wet ashing is a procedure for oxidizing organic
substances by using acids and oxidizing agents or their
combinations. Minerals are solubilized without vola-
tilization. Wet ashing often is preferable to dry ashing
as a preparation for speciﬁc elemental analysis. Wet
ashing often uses a combination of acids and requires
a special perchloric acid hood if that acid is used.

7.1.2 Importance of Ash in Food Analysis
Ash content represents the total mineral content in
foods. Determining the ash content may be important
for several reasons. It is a part of proximate analy-
sis for nutritional evaluation. Ashing is the ﬁrst step
in preparing a food sample for speciﬁc elemental
analysis. Because certain foods are high in particu-
lar minerals, ash content becomes important. One can
usually expect a constant elemental content from the
ash of animal products, but that from plant sources is
variable.

Cereals, bread, and pasta

Rice, brown, long-grain, raw
Corn meal, whole-grain, yellow
Hominy, canned, white
White rice, long-grain, regular, raw,

enriched

Wheat ﬂour, whole-grain
Macaroni, dry, enriched
Rye bread

Dairy products

Milk, reduced fat, ﬂuid, 2%
Evaporated milk, canned, with added

vitamin A

Butter, with salt
Cream, ﬂuid, half-and-half
Margarine, hard, regular, soybean
Yogurt, plain, low fat
Fruits and vegetables

Apples, raw, with skin
Bananas, raw
Cherries, sweet, raw
Raisins
Potatoes, raw, skin
Tomatoes, red, ripe, raw

Meat, poultry, and ﬁsh

Eggs, whole, raw, fresh
Fish ﬁllet, battered or breaded, and fried
Pork, fresh, leg (ham), whole, raw
Hamburger, regular, single patty, plain
Chicken, broilers or fryers, breast meat

only, raw

Beef, chuck, arm pot roast, raw

1.5
1.1
0.9
0.6

1.6
0.9
2.5

0.7
1.6

2.1
0.7
2.0
1.1

0.2
0.8
0.5
1.9
1.6
0.5

0.9
2.5
0.9
1.9
1.0

1.1

From US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Ser-
vice (2009) USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Ref-
erence. Release 22. Nutrient Data Laboratory Home Page:
http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl

108

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

grain and grain products with bran would tend to be
higher in ash content than such products without bran.
Nuts and nut products contain 0.8–3.4% ash, while
meat, poultry, and seafoods contain 0.7–1.3% ash.

7.2 METHODS

Principles, materials, instrumentation, general proce-
dures, and applications are described below for var-
ious ash determination methods. Refer to methods
cited for detailed instructions of the procedures.

7.2.1 Sample Preparation
It cannot be overemphasized that the small sample
used for ash, or other determinations, needs to be very
carefully chosen so that it represents the original mate-
rials. A 2–10-g sample generally is used for ash deter-
mination. For that purpose, milling, grinding, and
the like probably will not alter the ash content much;
however, if this ash is a preparatory step for speciﬁc
mineral analyses, contamination by microelements is
of potential concern. Remember, most grinders and
mincers are of steel construction. Repeated use of
glassware can be a source of contaminants as well. The
water source used in dilutions also may contain con-
taminants of some microelements. Distilled-deionized
water always should be used.

7.2.1.1 PlantMaterials
Plant materials are generally dried by routine methods
prior to grinding. The temperature of drying is of little
consequence for ashing. However, the sample may be
used for multiple determinations – protein, ﬁber, and
so on – which require consideration of temperature for
drying. Fresh stem and leaf tissue probably should be
dried in two stages (i.e., ﬁrst at a lower temperature of
55
C, then a higher temperature) especially to prevent
artifact lignin. Plant material with 15% or less moisture
may be ashed without prior drying.

◦

7.2.1.2 FatandSugarProducts
Animal products, syrups, and spices require treat-
ments prior to ashing because of high fat, moisture
(spattering, swelling), or high sugar content (foaming)
that may result in loss of sample. Meats, sugars, and
syrups need to be evaporated to dryness on a steam
bath or with an infrared (IR) lamp. One or two drops
of olive oil (which contains no ash) are added to allow
steam to escape as a crust is formed on the product.

Smoking and burning may occur upon ashing for
some products (e.g., cheese, seafood, spices). Allow
this smoking and burning to ﬁnish slowly by keeping

the mufﬂe door open prior to the normal procedure. A
sample may be ashed after drying and fat extraction.
In most cases, mineral loss is minimal during dry-
ing and fat extraction. Under no circumstances should
fat-extracted samples be heated until all the ether has
been evaporated.

7.2.2 Dry Ashing
7.2.2.1 PrinciplesandInstrumentation
Dry ashing is incineration at high temperature (525
C
or higher). Incineration is accomplished with a muf-
ﬂe furnace. Several models of mufﬂe furnaces are
available, ranging from large-capacity units requiring
either 208 or 240 V supplies to small benchtop units
utilizing 110-V outlets.

◦

◦

Crucible selection becomes critical

in ashing
because the type depends upon the speciﬁc use.
Quartz crucibles are resistant to acids and halogens,
but not alkali, at high temperatures. Vycor R(cid:2)
brand
◦
C, but Pyrex R(cid:2)
crucibles are stable to 900
Gooch cru-
◦
cibles are limited to 500
C. Ashing at a lower tem-
perature of 500–525
C may result in slightly higher
ash values because of less decomposition of carbonates
and loss of volatile salts. Porcelain crucibles resem-
ble quartz crucibles in their properties, but will crack
with rapid temperature changes. Porcelain crucibles
are relatively inexpensive and usually the crucible
of choice. Steel crucibles are resistant to both acids
and alkalies and are inexpensive, but they are com-
posed of chromium and nickel, which are possible
sources of contamination. Platinum crucibles are very
inert and are probably the best crucibles, but they
are currently far too expensive for routine use for
large numbers of samples. Quartz ﬁber crucibles are
disposable, unbreakable, and can withstand tempera-
tures up to 1000
C. They are porous, allowing air to
circulate around the sample and speed combustion.
This reduces ashing times signiﬁcantly and makes
them ideal for solids and viscous liquids. Quartz ﬁber
also cools in seconds, virtually eliminating the risk of
burns.

◦

All crucibles should be marked for identiﬁcation.
Marks on crucibles with a felt-tip marking pen will dis-
appear during ashing in a mufﬂe furnace. Laboratory
inks scribed with a steel pin are available commer-
cially. Crucibles also may be etched with a diamond
point and marked with a 0.5 M solution of FeCl3, in
20% HCl. An iron nail dissolved in concentrated HC1
forms brown goo that is a satisfactory marker. The
crucibles should be ﬁred and cleaned prior to use.

The advantages of conventional dry ashing are that
it is a safe method, it requires no added reagents or
blank subtraction, and little attention is needed once
ignition begins. Usually a large number of crucibles

Chapter 7 • Ash Analysis

109

can be handled at once, and the resultant ash can be
used additionally in other analyses for most individ-
ual elements, acid-insoluble ash, and water-soluble
and insoluble ash. The disadvantages are the length of
time required (12–18 h or overnight) and expensive
equipment. There will be a loss of the volatile ele-
ments and interactions between mineral components
and crucibles. Volatile elements at risk of being lost
include As, B, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Pb, Hg, Ni, P, V, and Zn.

7.2.2.2 Procedures
AOAC International has several dry ashing proce-
dures (e.g., AOAC Methods 900.02 A or B, 920.117,
923.03) for certain individual foodstuffs. The general
procedure includes the following steps:

1. Weigh a 5–10-g sample into a tared crucible.

Predry if the sample is very moist.

2. Place crucibles in a cool mufﬂe furnace. Use
tongs, gloves, and protective eyewear if the
mufﬂe furnace is warm.

3. Ignite 12–18 h (or overnight) at about 550
4. Turn off mufﬂe furnace and wait to open it until
the temperature has dropped to at least 250
C,
preferably lower. Open door carefully to avoid
losing ash that may be ﬂuffy.

C.
◦

◦

5. Using safety tongs, quickly transfer crucibles
to a desiccator with a porcelain plate and des-
iccant. Cover crucibles, close desiccator, and
allow crucibles to cool prior to weighing.

Note. Warm crucibles will heat air within the desicca-
tor. With hot samples, a cover may bump to allow air
to escape. A vacuum may form on cooling. At the end
of the cooling period, the desiccator cover should be
removed gradually by sliding to one side to prevent
a sudden inrush of air. Covers with a ground glass
sleeve or ﬁtted for a rubber stopper allow for slow
release of a vacuum.

The ash content is calculated as follows:

% ash (dry basis)

wt after ashing−tare wt of crucible

original sample wt×dry matter coefﬁcient

=

× 100

[1]

where:

dry matter coefﬁcient = % solids/100

For example, if corn meal is 87% dry matter, the
dry matter coefﬁcient would be 0.87. If ash is calcu-
lated on an as-received or wet weight basis (includes
moisture), delete the dry matter coefﬁcient from the
denominator. If moisture was determined in the same
crucible prior to ashing, the denominator becomes
(dry sample wt - tared crucible wt).

7.2.2.3 SpecialApplications
Some of the AOAC procedures recommend steps
in addition to those listed previously. If carbon is
still present following the initial incineration, several
drops of water or nitric acid should be added; then the
sample should be re-ashed. If the carbon persists, such
as with high-sugar samples, follow this procedure:

1. Suspend the ash in water.
2. Filter through ashless ﬁlter paper because this

residue tends to form a glaze.

3. Dry the ﬁltrate.
4. Place paper and dried ﬁltrate in mufﬂe furnace

and re-ash.

Other suggestions that may be helpful and accelerate
incineration:

1. High-fat samples should be extracted either by
using the crude fat determination procedure
or by burning off prior to closing the mufﬂe
furnace. Pork fat, for example, can form a com-
bustible mixture inside the furnace and burn
with the admission of oxygen if the door is
opened.

2. Glycerin, alcohol, and hydrogen will accelerate

ashing.

3. Samples such as jellies will spatter and can be

mixed with cotton wool.

4. Salt-rich foods may require a separate ashing
of water-insoluble components and salt-rich
water extract. Use a crucible cover to prevent
spattering.

5. An alcoholic solution of magnesium acetate can
be added to accelerate ashing of cereals. An
appropriate blank determination is necessary.

7.2.3 Wet Ashing
7.2.3.1 Principle,Materials,andApplications
Wet ashing is sometimes called wet oxidation or wet
digestion. Its primary use is preparation for speciﬁc
mineral analysis and metallic poisons. Often, analyti-
cal testing laboratories use only wet ashing in prepar-
ing samples for certain mineral analyses (e.g., Fe, Cu,
Zn, P), because losses would occur by volatilization
during dry ashing.

There are several advantages to using the wet ash-
ing procedure. Minerals will usually stay in solution,
and there is little or no loss from volatilization because
of the lower temperature. The oxidation time is short
and requires a hood, hot plate, and long tongs, plus
safety equipment.

The disadvantages of wet ashing are that it takes vir-
tually constant operator attention, corrosive reagents
are necessary, and only small numbers of samples can

110

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

be handled at any one time. If the wet digestion uti-
lizes perchloric acid, all work needs to be carried out
in an expensive special fume hood called a perchloric
acid hood.

Unfortunately, a single acid used in wet ashing
does not give complete and rapid oxidation of organic
material, so a mixture of acids often is used. Com-
binations of the following acid solutions are used
most often: (1) nitric acid, (2) sulfuric acid-hydrogen
peroxide, and (3) perchloric acid. Different combina-
tions are recommended for different types of samples.
The nitric–perchloric combination is generally faster
than the sulfuric–nitric procedure. While wet diges-
tion with perchloric acid is an AOAC procedure (e.g.,
AOAC Method 975.03), many analytical
laborato-
ries avoid if possible the use of perchloric acid in
wet ashing and instead use a combination of nitric
acid with either sulfuric acid, hydrogen peroxide, or
hydrochloric acid.

Wet oxidation with perchloric acid is extremely
dangerous since the perchloric acid has a tendency
to explode. The perchloric acid hood that must be
used has wash-down capabilities and does not contain
plastic or glycerol-base caulking compounds. Precau-
tions for use of perchloric acid are found in the AOAC
methods under “Safe Handling of Special Chemical
Hazards.” Cautions must be taken when fatty foods
are wet ashed using perchloric acid. While perchloric
acid does not interfere with atomic absorption spec-
troscopy, it does interfere in the traditional colorimet-
ric assay for iron by reacting with iron in the sample
to form ferrous perchlorate, which forms an insoluble
complex with the o-phenanthrolene in the procedure.

7.2.3.2 Procedures
The following is a wet ash procedure using concen-
trated nitric and sulfuric acids (to be performed in a fume
hood) (John Budin, Silliker Laboratories, Chicago, IL,
personal communication):

1. Accurately weigh a dried, ground 1-g sample
in a 125-ml Erlenmeyer ﬂask (previously acid
washed and dried).

2. Prepare a blank of 3 ml of H2SO4 and 5 ml of
HNO3, to be treated like the samples. (Blank is
to be run with every set of samples.)

3. Add 3 ml of H2SO4 followed by 5 ml of HNO3

to the sample in the ﬂask.

4. Heat
◦

the sample on a hot plate at ca.
C (boiling). Brown-yellow fumes will be

200
observed.

5. Once the brown-yellow fumes cease and white
fumes from decomposing H2SO4 are observed,
the sample will become darker. Remove the

ﬂask from the hot plate. Do not allow the ﬂask
to cool to room temperature.
6. Slowly add 3–5 ml of HNO3.
7. Put the ﬂask back on the hot plate and allow
the HNO3 to boil off. Proceed to the next step
when all the HNO3 is removed and the color is
clear to straw yellow. If the solution is still dark
in color, add another 3–5 ml of HNO3 and boil.
Repeat the process until the solution is clear to
straw yellow.

8. While on the hot plate, reduce the volume
appropriately to allow for ease of ﬁnal transfer.
Allow the sample to cool to room temperature,
then quantitatively transfer the sample to an
appropriately sized volumetric ﬂask.

9. Dilute the sample to volume with ultrapure
water, and mix well. Dilute further, as appro-
priate, for the speciﬁc type of mineral being
analyzed.

The following procedure for a modiﬁed dry–wet
ash sample destruction may be used. It is listed under
“Minerals in Infant Formula, Enteral Products, and Pet
Foods” (AOAC Method 985.35).

1. Evaporate moist samples (25–50 ml)

◦

in an
C overnight or in a

appropriate dish at 100
microwave drying oven until dry.

◦

C furnace for 3–8 h.

2. Heat on a hot plate until smoking ceases.
3. Ash in a 525
4. Remove dish from furnace and allow to cool.
Ash should be grayish white to white and free
from carbon.

5. Cool and wet with deionized distilled water

plus 0.5–3.0 ml of HNO3.

6. Dry on a hot plate or steam bath and then return

◦

to a 525

C furnace for 1–2 h.

7. Repeat steps 5 and 6 if carbon persists. (Caution:

Some K may be lost with repeated ashing.)

8. Dissolve the ash in 5 ml of 1 M HNO3 by warm-
ing on a hot plate for 2–3 min to aid solution.
Transfer to an appropriate size volumetric ﬂask
(i.e., 50 ml), then repeat with two additional
portions of 1 M HNO3.

7.2.4 Microwave Ashing
Both wet ashing and dry ashing can be done using
microwave instrumentation, rather than the conven-
tional dry ashing in a mufﬂe furnace and wet ashing in
a ﬂask or beaker on a hot plate. The CEM Corporation
(Matthews, NC) has developed a series of instruments
for dry and wet ashing, as well as other laboratory
systems for microwave-assisted chemistry. While the
ashing procedures by conventional means can take
many hours, the use of microwave instrumentation

Chapter 7 • Ash Analysis

111

can reduce sample preparation time to minutes, allow-
ing laboratories to increase their sample throughput
signiﬁcantly. This advantage has led to widespread
use of microwave ashing, especially for wet ashing,
both within analytical laboratories and quality control
laboratories within food companies.

7.2.4.1 MicrowaveWetAshing
Microwave wet ashing (acid digestion) may be per-
formed safely in either an open- or closed-vessel
microwave system. Choice of the system depends on
the amount of sample and the temperatures required
for digesting. Because of the ability of the closed ves-
sels to contain higher pressures (some vessels can han-
dle up to 1500 psi), acids may be heated past their boil-
ing points. This ensures a more complete dissolution
of hard-to-digest substances. It also allows the chemist
to use nitric acid with samples that might normally
require a harsher acid, such as sulfuric or perchlo-
ric. In closed vessels speciﬁcally designed for high-
temperatures/high-pressure reactions, nitric acid can
reach a temperature of 240
C. Thus, nitric acid is often
the acid of choice, though hydrochloric, hydroﬂuo-
ric, and sulfuric acids also are used, depending on the
sample and the subsequent analysis being performed.
Closed-vessel microwave digestion systems (Fig. 7-1)
can process up to 40 samples at a time, with vessel
liners available in Teﬂon R(cid:2)
, TFMTM Fluoropolymer,
and quartz. These systems allow the input of time,
temperature, and pressure parameters in a step-by-
step format (ramping). In addition, some instruments
enable the user to adjust the power and offer “change-
on-the-ﬂy” software, which allows the method to be
changed while the reaction is running.

◦

Typically,

in a closed-vessel microwave system,
sample is placed in vessels with the appropriate
amount of acid. The vessels are sealed and set on a
carousel where the temperature and pressure sensors
are connected to a control vessel. The carousel then
is placed in the microwave cavity, and the sensors
are connected to the instrument. Time, temperature,
pressure, and power parameters are chosen and the
unit is started. Digestions normally take less than
30 min. Because of the pressure generated by rais-
ing the temperature of a reaction, the vessels must
be allowed to cool before being opened. The ability
to process multiple samples simultaneously provides
the chemist with greater throughput than traditional
methods. (Note that some closed-vessel microwave
digestion systems may also be used for acid concen-
tration, solvent extraction, protein hydrolysis, and
synthesis with the proper accessories.)

Open-vessel digestion systems (Fig. 7-2) are used
often for larger sample sizes (up to 10 g) and for sam-
ples that generate substantial amounts of gas as they
are digested. Open-vessel systems can process up to
six samples, each according to its own parameters in
a sequential or simultaneous format. Teﬂon R(cid:2)
, quartz,
or Pyrex R(cid:2)
vessels are used, and condensers are added
for reﬂuxing. Acid (reagent) is automatically added
according to the programmed parameters. Sulfuric
and nitric acids are used most often with open-vessel
systems, as they process reactions under atmospheric
conditions; however, hydrochloric and hydroﬂuoric
acids, as well as hydrogen peroxide, can be used.

7-1
f i g u r e

Microwave closed-vessel digestion system.
(Courtesy of CEM Corporation, Matthews,
NC.)

7-2
f i g u r e

Microwave open-vessel system. (Courtesy of
CEM Corporation, Matthews, NC.)

112

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

These instruments do not require the use of a fume
hood, because a vapor containment system contains
and neutralizes harmful fumes.

Generally, in an open-vessel microwave system,
the sample is placed in a vessel and the vessel is set
in a slot in the microwave system. Time, tempera-
ture, and reagent addition parameters are then chosen.
The unit is started, the acid is added, and the vapor
containment system neutralizes the fumes from the
reaction. Samples are typically processed much faster
and more reproducibly than on a conventional hot
plate. (Note that some open-vessel systems may be
used for evaporation and acid concentration as well.)

◦

7.2.4.2 MicrowaveDryAshing
Compared with conventional dry ashing in a muf-
ﬂe furnace that often takes many hours, microwave
mufﬂe furnaces (Fig. 7-3) can ash samples in min-
utes, decreasing analysis time by as much as 97%.
Microwave mufﬂe furnaces can reach temperatures
of up to 1200
C. These systems may be programmed
with various methods and to automatically warm up
and cool down. In addition, they are equipped with
exhaust systems that circulate the air in the cavity to
help decrease ashing times. Some also have scrubber
systems to neutralize any fumes. Any crucible that
may be used in a conventional mufﬂe furnace may be
used in a microwave furnace, including those made of
porcelain, platinum, quartz, and quartz ﬁber. Quartz
ﬁber crucibles cool in seconds and are not breakable.
Some systems can process up to 15 (25 ml) crucibles at
a time.

Typically, in microwave dry ashing, a desiccated
crucible is weighed and then sample is added and
it is weighed again. The crucible then is placed in
the microwave furnace, and the time and temperature
parameters are set. A step-by-step (ramping) format

may be used when programming the method. The sys-
tem is started and the program is run to completion.
The crucible then is carefully removed with tongs and
reweighed. The sample then may be further analyzed,
if necessary. Some tests call for acid to be added to a
dry ashed sample, which is then digested for further
analysis.

A comparative study (9) showed that dry ashing
various plants for 40 min using a microwave system
(CEM Corporation, Matthews NC) was similar to the
4-h time in a conventional mufﬂe furnace. Twenty
minutes was shown to be adequate for the plant mate-
rial used except for Cu determinations, which needed
40 min to obtain similar results. Other comparative
examples include dried egg yolks, which can be ashed
in 20 min in a microwave system, but require 4 h in a
conventional mufﬂe furnace. It takes 16 h to ash lactose
in a conventional mufﬂe furnace, but only 35 min in a
microwave furnace. Though microwave furnaces may
not hold as many samples as a conventional furnace,
their speed actually allows signiﬁcantly more samples
to be processed in the same amount of time. Also,
microwave furnaces do not require fume hood space.

7.2.5 Other Ash Measurements
The following are several special ash measurements
and their applications:

1. Soluble and insoluble ash (e.g., AOAC Met-

hod 900.02) – Applied to fruits.

2. Ash insoluble in acid – A measure of the sur-
face contamination of fruits and vegetables and
wheat and rice coatings; contaminants are gen-
erally silicates and remain insoluble in acid,
except HBr.

3. Alkalinity of ash (e.g., AOAC Method 900.02,
940.26) – Ash of fruits and vegetable is alkaline;
ash of meats and some cereals is acid.

4. Sulfated ash (AOAC Method 900.02, 950.77) –
Applied to sugars, syrups, and color additives.

7.3 COMPARISON OF METHODS

Ash determination by dry ashing requires expensive
equipment, especially if many samples are analyzed.
The mufﬂe furnace may have to be placed in a heat
room along with drying ovens and it requires a 220-V
outlet. It is important to make sure that large furnaces
of that type are equipped with a double-pole, single-
throw switch. Heating coils are generally exposed, and
care must be taken when taking samples in and out
with metal tongs. Desktop furnaces (110 V) are avail-
able for fewer samples. Wet ashing requires a hood
(a special hood if perchloric acid is used), corrosive

7-3
f i g u r e

Microwave mufﬂe furnace. (Courtesy of CEM
Corporation, Matthews, NC.)

Chapter 7 • Ash Analysis

113

reagents, and constant operator attention. While wet
oxidation causes little volatilization, dry ashing will
result in the loss of volatile elements. The type of fur-
ther elemental analyses will dictate the equipment.
Some micro- and most volatile elements will require
special equipment and procedures. Refer to Chaps. 12
and 24 for speciﬁc preparation procedures for elemen-
tal analyses. Both dry and wet ashing can be done
using microwave systems that utilize relatively expen-
sive instrumentation, but they greatly reduce the time
for ashing and do not require use of a fume hood.

7.4 SUMMARY

The two major types of ashing, dry ashing and wet oxi-
dation (ashing), can be done by conventional means
or using microwave systems. The procedure of choice
depends upon the use of ash following its deter-
mination, and limitations based on cost, time, and
sample numbers. Conventional dry ashing is based
upon incineration at high temperatures in a mufﬂe fur-
nace. Except for certain elements, the residue may be
used for further speciﬁc mineral analyses. Wet ashing
(oxidation) often is used as a preparation for speciﬁc
elemental analysis by simultaneously dissolving min-
erals and oxidizing all organic material. Wet ashing
conserves volatile element, but requires more operator
time than dry ashing and is limited to a smaller num-
ber of samples. Dry and wet ashing using microwave
technology reduces the time for analyses and requires
little additional equipment (special fume hood) or
space (heat room).

7.5 STUDY QUESTIONS

1. Identify four potential sources of error in the prepara-
tion of samples for ash analysis and describe a way to
overcome each.

2. You are determining the total ash content of a product
using the conventional dry ashing method. Your boss
asks you to switch to a conventional wet ashing method
because he/she has heard it takes less time than dry
ashing.
(a) Do you agree or disagree with your boss concerning

the time issue, and why?

(b) Not considering the time issues, why might you want
to continue using dry ashing, and why might you
change to wet ashing?

3. Your lab technician was to determine the ash content of
buttermilk by conventional dry ashing. The technician
weighed 5 g of buttermilk into one weighed platinum cru-
cible, immediately put the crucible into the mufﬂe furnace
using a pair of all stainless steel tongs, and ashed the sam-
ple for 48 h at 800
C. The crucible was removed from

◦

the mufﬂe furnace and set on a rack in the open until
it was cool enough to reweigh. Itemize the instructions
you should have given your technician before begin-
ning, so there would not have been the mistakes made
as described above.

4. How would you recommend to your technician to over-
come the following problems that could arise in conven-
tional dry ashing of various foods?
(a) You seem to be getting volatilization of phosphorus,
when you want to later determine the phosphorus
content.

(b) You are getting incomplete combustion of a product
high in sugar after a typical dry ashing procedure (i.e.,
the ash is dark colored, not white or pale gray).

(c) The typical procedure takes too long for your pur-
pose. You need to speed up the procedure, but you do
not want to use the standard wet ashing procedure.

(d) You have reason to believe the compound you want
to measure after dry ashing may be reacting with the
porcelain crucibles being used.

(e) You want to determine the iron content of some foods
but cannot seem to get the iron solubilized after the
dry ashing procedure.

5. Identify an advantage and disadvantage of using
microwave wet digesters or microwave mufﬂe furnaces
compared with conventional units.

7.6 PRACTICE PROBLEMS

1. A grain was found to contain 11.5% moisture. A 5.2146-
g sample was placed into a crucible (28.5053 g tare). The
ashed crucible weighed 28.5939 g. Calculate the percent-
age ash on (a) an as-received (wet weight) basis and (b) a
dry matter basis.

2. A vegetable (23.5000 g) was found to have 0.0940-g acid-
insoluble ash. What is the percentage of acid-insoluble
ash?

3. You wish to have at least 100 mg of ash from a cereal
grain. Assuming 2.5% ash on average, how many grams
of the grain should be weighed for ashing?

4. You wish to have a coefﬁcient of variation (CV) below
5% with your ash analyses. The following ash data are
obtained: 2.15%, 2.12%, 2.07%. Are these data acceptable,
and what is the CV?

5. The following data were obtained on a sample of ham-
burger: sample wt, 2.034 g; wt after drying, 1.0781 g; wt
after ether extraction, 0.4679 g; and wt of ash, 0.0233 g.
What is the percentage ash on (a) a wet weight basis and
(b) a fat-free basis?

Answers

1. (a) 1.70%, (b) 1.92%

Calculate ash from sample:

Crucible + ash: 28.5939 g
Tared crucible: 28.5053 g
Ash:

0.0886 g

114

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

(a) Calculate for ash on a wet weight basis (a):

5. (a) 1.1%, (b) 1.64%

0.0886 g ash

5.2146 g sample

× 100% = 1.70% or 1.7%

(b) Calculate for ash on a dry weight basis (b):

(cid:7)

0.0886 g ash ÷
(cid:5)

100% − 11.5%

×

100%

5.2146 g sample

(cid:6)(cid:8)

× 100%

dry matter coeff

= 1.92%

or

5.214 g sample × 11.5 g water
100 g sample

= 0.5997 g water

5.214 g sample − 0.5997 g water
= 4.6149 g sample dry wt

0.0886 g ash

4.6149 g dry wt sample

× 100% = 1.92%

2. 0.4%

Calculate % insoluble ash:

0.0940 g acid insoluble ash

23.5 g sample

× 100% = 0.4%

3. 4 g

100 mg = 0.1 g ash
2.5% = 2.5 g ash/100 g sample

2.5 g ash

100 g sample

= 0.1 g ash

x

2.5x = 10

x = 4 g sample

4. Yes, 1.9%

Calculate the mean:

2.15 + 2.12% + 2.07%

3

= 2.11%

Calculation of mean and standard deviation was done
using Excel:
1. 2.15%
2. 2.12%
3. 2.07%

Average = 2.11%
Std. deviation = 0.0404
Coefﬁcient of variation(CV) = SD
x
× 100% = 1.91%

CV = 0.0404
2.11

× 100%

It is within the 5% level for CV? YES.

Sample wet wt: 2.034 g
Sample dry wt: 1.0781 g
Wt after extraction: 0.4679 g
Wt of ash: 0.0233 g

(a) Calculate for wet weight basis:

0.0233 g ash
2.034 g sample

× 100% = 1.15%

(b) Calculate for fat-free basis:

2.034 g wet sample − 1.0781 g solids
= 0.9559 g water this is 47% moisture)

1.0781 g solids dry wt − 0.4679 g solids after
extraction = 0.6102 g fat

2.034 g wet sample − 0.6102 g fat
= 1.4238 g wet sample wt without fat

0.0233 g ash

(1.4238 g wet sample wt without fat)
= 1.64% ash, fat-free basis

× 100%

7.7 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The author of this chapter wishes to acknowledge
the contributions of Dr. Leniel H. Harbers (Emeri-
tus Professor, Kansas State University) for previous
editions of this chapter. Also acknowledged in the
preparation of this chapter is the assistance of Dr.
John Budin (Silliker Laboratories, Chicago Heights, IL)
and Ms. Michelle Horn (CEM Corporation, Matthews,
NC).

7.8 REFERENCES

1. Analytical Methods Committee (1960) Methods for the
destruction of organic matter. Analyst 85:643–656. This
report gives a number of methods for wet and dry
combustion and their applications, advantages, disad-
vantages, and hazards

2. AOAC International (2007) Ofﬁcial methods of analy-
sis, 18th edn., 2005; Current through revision 2, 2007
(On-line). AOAC International, Gaithersburg, MD. This
contains the ofﬁcial methods for many speciﬁc food
ingredients. It may be difﬁcult for the beginning student
to follow

3. Aurand LW, Woods AE, Wells MR (1987) Food composi-
tion and analysis. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
The chapters that deal with ash are divided by food-
stuffs. General dry procedures are discussed under each
major heading

Chapter 7 • Ash Analysis

115

4. Bakkali K, Martos NR, Souhail B, Ballesteros E
(2009) Characterization of trace metals in vegetables
by graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry
after closed vessel microwave digestion. Food Chem
116(2):590–594

5. Mesko MF, De Moraes DP, Barin JS, Dressler VL, Knap-
pet G (2006) Digestion of biological materials using
the microwave-assisted sample combustion technique.
Microchem J 82:183–188

6. Neggers YH, Lane RH (1995) Minerals, ch. 8. In: Jeon
IJ, Ikins WG (eds) Analyzing food for nutrition labeling
and hazardous contaminants. Marcel Dekker, New York.
This chapter compares wet and dry ashing and summa-
rizes in tables the following: losses of speciﬁc elements
during dry ashing; acids used in wet oxidation related
to applications; AOAC methods for speciﬁc elements
related to food applications

7. Pomeranz Y, Meloan C (1994) Food analysis: theory and
practice, 3rd edn. Chapman & Hall, New York. Chap-
ter 35 on ash and minerals gives an excellent narrative
on ashing methods and is easy reading for a student in

food chemistry. A good reference list of speciﬁc mineral
losses is given at the end of the chapter. No stepwise
procedures are given

8. Smith GF (1953) The wet ashing of organic matter
employing hot concentrated perchloric acid. The liquid
ﬁre reaction. Anal Chim Acta 8:397–421. The treatise
gives an in-depth review of wet ashing with perchloric
acid. Tables on reaction times with foodstuffs and color
reactions are informative. It is easy for the food scientist
to understand

9. Wehr HM, Frank JF (eds) (2004) Standard methods for
the examination of dairy products, 17th edn. American
Public Health Association, Washington, DC. This text
gives detailed analytical procedures for ashing dairy
products

10. Wooster HA (1956) Nutritional data, 3rd edn. H.J. Heinz,

Pittsburgh, PA

11. Zhang H, Dotson P (1994) Use of microwave mufﬂe fur-
nace for dry ashing plant tissue samples. Commun Soil
Sci Plant Anal 25(9/10):1321–1327

8

c h a p t e r

Fat Analysis

DavidB.Min
DepartmentofFoodScienceandTechnology,TheOhioStateUniversity,
Columbus,OH43210,USA
min2@osu.edu
and
WayneC.Ellefson
NutritionalChemistryandFoodSafety,CovanceLaboratories,
3301KinsmanBoulevard,Madison,WI53714,USA
Wayne.Ellefson@covance.com

8.1 Introduction 119

8.1.1 Deﬁnitions 119
8.1.2 General Classiﬁcation 119
8.1.2.1 Simple Lipids 119
8.1.2.2 Compound Lipids 119
8.1.2.3 Derived Lipids 119

8.1.3 Content of Lipids in Foods 119
8.1.4 Importance of Analysis 120

8.2 General Considerations 120
8.3 Solvent Extraction Methods 120

8.3.1 Sample Preparation 121

8.3.1.1 Predrying Sample 121

S.S. Nielsen, Food Analysis, Food Science Texts Series, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1478-1_8,
c(cid:2) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

117

118

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

8.3.1.2 Particle Size Reduction 121
8.3.1.3 Acid Hydrolysis 121

8.3.2 Solvent Selection 122
8.3.3 Continuous Solvent Extraction Method:

Goldﬁsh Method 122
8.3.3.1 Principle and Characteristics 122
8.3.3.2 Procedure 122
8.3.3.3 Calculations 122

8.3.4 Semicontinuous Solvent Extraction Method:

Soxhlet Method 123
8.3.4.1 Principle and Characteristics 123
8.3.4.2 Preparation of Sample 123
8.3.4.3 Procedure 123
8.3.4.4 Calculation 123

8.3.5 Discontinuous Solvent Extraction

Methods 123
8.3.5.1 Mojonnier Method 123
8.3.5.1.1 Principle and

Characteristics 123
8.3.5.1.2 Procedure: Milk Fat

Method (AOAC Method
989.05) 124

8.3.5.2 Chloroform–Methanol

Procedure 124
8.3.5.2.1 Principle and

Characteristics 124
8.3.5.2.2 Procedure (Modiﬁed

Folch Extraction)
(9, 11) 125

8.3.6 Total Fat by GC for Nutrition Labeling

(AOAC Method 996.06) 125
8.3.6.1 Principle 125
8.3.6.2 Sample Preparation

Procedures 125

8.3.6.3 Chromatographic Conditions 127
8.3.6.4 Calculations 127

8.4 Nonsolvent Wet Extraction Methods 127
8.4.1 Babcock Method for Milk Fat (AOAC

Method 989.04 and 989.10) 127
8.4.1.1 Principle 127
8.4.1.2 Procedure 127
8.4.1.3 Applications 130

8.4.2 Gerber Method for Milk Fat 130

8.4.2.1 Principle 130
8.4.2.2 Procedure 130
8.4.2.3 Applications 130

8.5 Instrumental Methods 130
8.5.1 Infrared Method 130
8.5.2 Speciﬁc Gravity (Foss-Let Method) 130
8.5.3 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 131

8.6 Comparison of Methods 131
8.7 Summary 131
8.8 Study Questions 131
8.9 Practice Problems 132
8.10 References 132

Chapter 8 • Fat Analysis

8.1 INTRODUCTION

8.1.1 Deﬁnitions
Lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates constitute the
principal structural components of foods. Lipids are
a group of substances that,
in general, are soluble
in ether, chloroform, or other organic solvents but
are sparingly soluble in water. However, there exists
no clear scientiﬁc deﬁnition of a lipid, primarily due
to the water solubility of certain molecules that fall
within one of the variable categories of food lipids
(1). Some lipids, such as triacylglycerols, are very
hydrophobic. Other lipids, such as di- and monoa-
cylglycerols, have both hydrophobic and hydrophilic
moieties in their molecules and are soluble in rela-
tively polar solvents (2). Short-chain fatty acids such
as C1–C4 are completely miscible in water and insolu-
ble in nonpolar solvents (1). The most widely accepted
deﬁnition is based on solubility as previously stated.
While most macromolecules are characterized by com-
mon structural features,
the designation of “lipid”
being deﬁned by solubility characteristics is unique to
lipids (2). Lipids comprise a broad group of substances
that have some common properties and compositional
similarities (3). Triacylglycerols are fats and oils that
represent the most prevalent category of the group of
compounds known as lipids. The terms lipids, fats,
and oils are often used interchangeably. The term
“lipid” commonly refers to the broad, total collection
of food molecules that meet the deﬁnition previously
stated. Fats generally refer to those lipids that are solid
at room temperature and oils generally refer to those
lipids that are liquid at room temperature. While there
may not be an exact scientiﬁc deﬁnition, the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) has established a reg-
ulatory deﬁnition for nutrition labeling purposes. The
FDA has deﬁned total fat as the sum of fatty acids from
C4 to C24, calculated as triglycerides. This deﬁnition
provides a clear path for resolution of any nutrition
labeling disputes.

8.1.2 General Classiﬁcation
The general classiﬁcation of lipids that follows is
useful to differentiate lipids in foods (3).

8.1.2.1 SimpleLipids
Ester of fatty acids with alcohol:

glycerols

• Fats: Esters of fatty acids with glycerol – triacyl-
• Waxes: Esters of fatty acids with long-chain
alcohols other than glycerols (e.g., myricyl
palmitate, cetyl palmitate, vitamin A esters,
and vitamin D esters)

119

8.1.2.2 CompoundLipids
Compounds containing groups in addition to an ester
of a fatty acid with an alcohol:

• Phospholipids: Glycerol esters of fatty acids,
phosphoric acids, and other groups contain-
ing nitrogen (e.g., phosphatidyl choline, phos-
phatidyl serine, phosphatidyl ethanolamine,
and phosphatidyl inositol)
• Cerebrosides: Compounds containing fatty
acids, a carbohydrate, and a nitrogen moiety
(e.g., galactocerebroside and glucocerebroside)
• Sphingolipids: Compounds containing fatty
acids, a nitrogen moiety, and phosphoryl group
(e.g., sphingomyelins)

8.1.2.3 DerivedLipids
Derived lipids are substances derived from neutral
lipids or compound lipids. They have the general
properties of lipids – examples are fatty acids, long-
chain alcohols,
fat-soluble vitamins, and
hydrocarbons.

sterols,

8.1.3 Content of Lipids in Foods
Foods may contain any or all types of the lipid com-
pounds previously mentioned. The lipid content in
bovine milk (Table 8-1) illustrates the complexity and
variability of lipids in a food system, having lipids that
differ in polarity and concentrations.

Foods contain many types of lipids, but those
which tend to be of greatest importance are the tri-
acylglycerols and the phospholipids. Liquid triacyl-
glycerols at room temperature are referred to as oils,

8-1
table

Lipids of Bovine Milk

KindsofLipids

Triacylglycerols
Diacylglycerols
Monoacylglycerols
Phospholipids
Sterols
Squalene
Free fatty acids
Waxes
Vitamin A
Carotenoids
Vitamin D
Vitamin E
Vitamin K

PercentofTotalLipids

97–99

0.28–0.59
0.016–0.038

0.2–1.0
0.25–0.40

Trace

Trace

0.10–0.44
(7–8.5 μ g/g)
(8–10 μ g/g)
(2–5 μ g/g)

Trace

Trace

Adapted from (4) with permission of S. Patton and (5) Principlesof
DairyChemistry.Jenness R. and Patton S. Copyright c(cid:2)1959, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc with permission.

120

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

such as soybean oil and olive oil, and are generally of
plant origin. Solid triacylglycerols at room tempera-
ture are termed as fats. Lard and tallow are examples
of fats, which are generally from animals. The term
fat is applicable to all triacylglycerols whether they
are normally solid or liquid at ambient temperatures.
Table 8-2 shows the wide range of lipid content in
different foods.

8.1.4 Importance of Analysis
An accurate and precise quantitative and qualitative
analysis of lipids in foods is important for accu-
rate nutritional labeling, determination of whether
the food meets the standard of identity, and to ensure
that the product meets manufacturing speciﬁcations.
Inaccuracies in analysis may prove costly for manu-
facturers and could result in a product of undesirable
quality and functionality.

8.2 GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

By deﬁnition, lipids are soluble in organic solvents
and insoluble in water. Therefore, water insolubility
is the essential analytical property used as the basis
for the separation of lipids from proteins, water, and
carbohydrates in foods. Glycolipids are soluble in alco-
hols and have a low solubility in hexane. In contrast,
triacylglycerols are soluble in hexane and petroleum
ether, which are nonpolar solvents. The wide range
of relative hydrophobicity of different lipids makes
the selection of a single universal solvent impossi-
ble for lipid extraction of foods. Some lipids in foods
are components of complex lipoproteins and liposac-
charides; therefore, successful extraction requires that
bonds between lipids and proteins or carbohydrates be
broken so that the lipids can be freed and solubilized
in the extracting organic solvents.

8.3 SOLVENT EXTRACTION METHODS

The total lipid content of a food is commonly deter-
mined by organic solvent extraction methods or by
alkaline or acid hydrolysis followed by Mojonnier
extraction. For multicomponent food products, acid
hydrolysis is often the method of choice. Both acid
hydrolysis and alkaline hydrolysis methods can be
performed using Mojonnier extraction equipment. The
use of acid hydrolysis eliminates some of the matrix
effects that may be exhibited by simple solvent extrac-
tion methods. The accuracy of direct solvent extraction
methods (i.e., without prior acid or alkaline hydrol-
ysis) greatly depends on the solubility of the lipids
in the solvent used and the ability to separate the

8-2
table

FoodItem

Fat Content of Selected Foods

PercentFat
(WetWeight

Basis)

Cereals, bread, and pasta

Rice, white, long-grain, regular, raw,

enriched

Sorghum
Wheat, soft white
Rye
Wheat germ, crude
Rye bread
Cracked-wheat bread
Macaroni, dry, enriched

Dairy products

Milk, reduced fat, ﬂuid, 2%
Skim milk, ﬂuid
Cheddar cheese
Yogurt, plain, whole milk

Fats and oils

Lard, shortening, oils
Butter, with salt
Margarine, regular, hard, soybean
Salad dressing
Italian, commercial, regular
Thousand Island, commercial, regular
French, commercial, regular
Mayonnaise, soybean oil, with salt

Fruits and vegetables

Apples, raw, with skin
Oranges, raw, all commercial varieties
Blackberries, raw
Avocados, raw, all commercial varieties
Asparagus, raw
Lima beans, immature seeds, raw
Sweet corn, yellow, raw

Legumes

Soybeans, mature seeds, raw
Black beans, mature seed, raw

Meat, poultry, and ﬁsh

Beef, ﬂank, separable lean and fat
Chicken, broilers or fryers, breast meat only
Bacon, pork, cured, raw
Pork, fresh, loin, whole, raw
Finﬁsh, halibut, Atlantic and Paciﬁc, raw
Finﬁsh, cod, Atlantic, raw

Nuts

Coconut meat, raw
Almonds, dried, unblanched, dry roasted
Walnuts, black, dried
Egg, whole, raw, fresh

0.7

3.3
2.0
2.5
9.7
3.3
3.9
1.5

2.0
0.2
33.1
3.2

100.0
81.1
80.5

28.3
35.1
44.8
79.4

0.2
0.1
0.5
14.7
0.1
0.9
1.2

19.9
1.4

5.0
1.2
45.0
12.6
2.3
0.7

33.5
52.8
56.6
10.0

From US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service
(2009) USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference.
Release 22. Nutrient Data Laboratory Home Page, http://www.
ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl

lipids from complexes with other macromolecules.
The lipid content of a food determined by extrac-
tion with one solvent may be quite different from the

Chapter 8 • Fat Analysis

121

content determined with another solvent of different
polarity. In addition to solvent extraction methods,
there are nonsolvent wet extraction methods and sev-
eral instrumental methods that utilize the physical and
chemical properties of lipids in foods for fat content
determination. For nutrition labeling purposes, total
fat is most commonly determined by gas chromato-
graphy (GC) analysis.

Many of the methods cited in this chapter are
ofﬁcial methods of AOAC International. Refer to
these methods and other original references cited for
detailed instructions of procedures. There are many
methods available for the determination of lipid con-
tent. This chapter will focus on some of the primary
methods in common use.

8.3.1 Sample Preparation
The validity of the fat analysis of a food depends
on proper sampling and preservation of the sample
before the analysis (see also Chap. 5). An ideal sample
should be as close as possible in all of its intrinsic prop-
erties to the material from which it is taken. However,
a sample is considered satisfactory if the properties
under investigation correspond to those of the bulk
material within the limits of the test (7).

The sample preparation for lipid analysis depends
on the type of food and the type and nature of lipids
in the food (8). The extraction method for lipids in liq-
uid milk is generally different from that for lipids in
solid soybeans. To analyze the lipids in foods effec-
tively, knowledge of the structure, the chemistry, and
the occurrence of the principal lipid classes and their
constituents is necessary. Therefore, there is no sin-
gle standard method for the extraction of all kinds of
lipids in different foods. For the best results, sample
preparation should be carried out under an inert atmo-
sphere of nitrogen at low temperature to minimize
chemical reactions such as lipid oxidation.

Several preparatory steps are common in lipid
analysis. These act to aid in extraction by removal of
water, reduction of particle size, or separation of the
lipid from bound proteins and/or carbohydrates.

8.3.1.1 PredryingSample
Lipids cannot be effectively extracted with ethyl ether
from moist food because the solvent cannot easily pen-
etrate the moist food tissues due to the hydrophobicity
of the solvents used or the hydroscopic nature of the
solvents. The ether, which is hygroscopic, becomes sat-
urated with water and inefﬁcient for lipid extraction.
Drying the sample at elevated temperatures is unde-
sirable because some lipids become bound to proteins
and carbohydrates, and bound lipids are not easily

extracted with organic solvents. Vacuum oven dry-
ing at low temperature or lyophilization increases the
surface area of the sample for better lipid extraction.
Predrying makes the sample easier to grind for better
extraction, breaks fat–water emulsions to make fats
dissolve easily in the organic solvent, and helps to free
fat from the tissues of foods (7).

8.3.1.2 ParticleSizeReduction
The extraction efﬁciency of lipids from dried foods
depends on particle size; therefore, adequate grinding
is very important. The classical method of determin-
ing fat in oilseeds involves the extraction of the ground
seeds with selected solvent after repeated grinding at
low temperature to minimize lipid oxidation. For bet-
ter extraction, the sample and solvent are mixed in a
high-speed comminuting device such as a blender. It
can be difﬁcult to extract lipids from whole soybeans
because of the limited porosity of the soybean hull and
its sensitivity to dehydrating agents. The lipid extrac-
tion from soybeans is easily accomplished if the beans
are broken mechanically by grinding. Extraction of fat
from ﬁnished products can be a challenge, based on
the ingredients (e.g., energy bars with nuts, caramel,
protein, granola, soybean oil). Such products may best
be ground after freezing with liquid nitrogen.

8.3.1.3 AcidHydrolysis
A signiﬁcant portion of the lipids in foods such as
dairy, bread, ﬂour, and animal products is bound
to proteins and carbohydrates, and direct extraction
with nonpolar solvents is inefﬁcient. Such foods must
be prepared for lipid extraction by acid hydrolysis.
This includes a signiﬁcant percentage of ﬁnished food
products. Table 8-3 shows the inaccuracy that can
occur if samples are not prepared by acid hydrolysis.
Acid hydrolysis can break both covalently and ioni-
cally bound lipids into easily extractable lipid forms.
The sample can be predigested by reﬂuxing for 1 h

8-3
table

Effects of Acid Digestion on Fat Extraction
from Foods

PercentFat

AcidHydrolysis

NoAcidHydrolysis

Dried egg
Yeast
Flour
Noodles
Semolina

42.39
6.35
1.73

3.77–4.84
1.86–1.93

36.74
3.74
1.20

2.1–3.91
1.1–1.37

Adapted from (6), p. 154, with permission.

122

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

as the Wiley and Underwriters) tests are examples of
continuous lipid extraction methods (6, 7).

8.3.3.2 Procedure(SeeFig.8-1)

1. Weigh predried porous ceramic extraction
thimble. Place vacuum oven dried sample
in thimble and weigh again.
(Sample could
instead be combined with sand in thimble and
then dried.)

2. Weigh predried extraction beaker.
3. Place ceramic extraction thimble into glass
holding tube and then up into condenser of
apparatus.

4. Place anhydrous ethyl ether (or petroleum
ether) in extraction beaker and put beaker on
heater of apparatus.

5. Extract for 4 h.
6. Lower the heater and let sample cool.
7. Remove the extraction beaker and let air dry
C for 30 min. Cool

overnight,
beaker in desiccator and weigh.

then at 100

◦

8.3.3.3 Calculations

Weight of fat in sample = (beaker + fat) − beaker
[1]
% Fat on dry weight basis
= (g of fat in sample/g of dried sample) × 100
[2]

with 3 N hydrochloric acid. Ethanol and solid hexam-
etaphosphate may be added to facilitate separation of
lipids from other components before food lipids are
extracted with solvents (6, 7). For example, the acid
hydrolysis of two eggs requires 10 ml of HCl and heat-
ing in a water bath at 65
C for 15–25 min or until the
solution is clear (6).

◦

8.3.2 Solvent Selection
Ideal solvents for fat extraction should have a high sol-
vent power for lipids and low or no solvent power
for proteins, amino acids, and carbohydrates. They
should evaporate readily and leave no residue, have a
relatively low boiling point, and be nonﬂammable and
nontoxic in both liquid and vapor states. The ideal sol-
vent should penetrate sample particles readily, be in
single component form to avoid fractionation, and be
inexpensive and nonhygroscopic (6, 7). It is difﬁcult to
ﬁnd an ideal fat solvent to meet all of these require-
ments. Ethyl ether and petroleum ether are the most
commonly used solvents, but pentane and hexane are
used to extract oil from soybeans.

Ethyl ether has a boiling point of 34.6

C and is a
better solvent for fat than petroleum ether. It is gen-
erally expensive compared to other solvents, has a
greater danger of explosion and ﬁre hazards, is hygro-
scopic, and forms peroxides (6). Petroleum ether is
the low boiling point fraction of petroleum and is
composed mainly of pentane and hexane. It has a
boiling point of 35–38
C and is more hydrophobic
than ethyl ether. It is selective for more hydrophobic
lipids, cheaper, less hygroscopic, and less ﬂammable
than ethyl ether. The detailed properties of petroleum
ether for fat extraction are described in AOAC Method
945.16 (8).

◦

◦

A combination of two or three solvents is fre-
quently used. The solvents should be puriﬁed and
peroxide free and the proper solvent-to-solute ratio
must be used to obtain the best extraction of lipids
from foods (7).

8.3.3 Continuous Solvent Extraction Method:
Goldﬁsh Method
8.3.3.1 PrincipleandCharacteristics
For continuous solvent extraction, solvent from a boil-
ing ﬂask continuously ﬂows over the sample held in
a ceramic thimble. Fat content is measured by weight
loss of the sample or by weight of the fat removed.

The continuous methods give faster and more efﬁ-
cient extraction than semicontinuous extraction meth-
ods. However,
they may cause channeling which
results in incomplete extraction. The Goldﬁsh (as well

8-1
f i g u r e

Goldﬁsh fat extractor. (Courtesy of Labconco
Corp., Kansas City, MO.)
(http://www.
labconco.com/_scripts/EditItem.asp?
ItemID=487)

Chapter 8 • Fat Analysis

123

8.3.4 Semicontinuous Solvent Extraction
Method: Soxhlet Method
The Soxhlet method (AOAC Method 920.39C for
Cereal Fat; AOAC Method 960.39 for Meat Fat) (8) is
an example of the semicontinuous extraction method
and is described below.

8.3.4.1 PrincipleandCharacteristics
For semicontinuous solvent extraction,
the solvent
builds up in the extraction chamber for 5–10 min and
completely surrounds the sample and then siphons
back to the boiling ﬂask. Fat content is measured by
weight loss of the sample or by weight of the fat
removed.

This method provides a soaking effect of the
sample and does not cause channeling. However,
this method requires more time than the continuous
method. Instrumentation for a more rapid and auto-
mated version of the Soxhlet method is available (e.g.,
SoxtecTM, FOSS in North America, Eden Prairie, MN)
and is used for some quality control applications.

8.3.4.2 PreparationofSample
If the sample contains more than 10% H2O, dry the
sample to constant weight at 95–100
C under pressure
≤ 100 mm Hg for about 5 h (AOAC Method 934.01).

◦

8.3.4.3 Procedure(SeeFig.8-2)

1. Weigh, to the nearest mg, about 2 g of predried
sample into a predried extraction thimble, with
porosity permitting a rapid ﬂow of ethyl ether.
Cover sample in thimble with glass wool.

2. Weigh predried boiling ﬂask.
3. Put anhydrous ether in boiling ﬂask. Note: The
anhydrous ether is prepared by washing com-
mercial ethyl ether with two or three portions
of H2O, adding NaOH or KOH, and letting
stand until most of H2O is absorbed from the
ether. Add small pieces of metallic Na and
let hydrogen evolution cease (AOAC Method
920.39B). Petroleum ether may be used instead
of anhydrous ether (AOAC Method 960.39).

4. Assemble boiling ﬂask, Soxhlet ﬂask, and con-

denser.

5. Extract in a Soxhlet extractor at a rate of ﬁve or
six drops per second by condensation for about
4 h, or for 16 h at a rate of two or three drops per
second by heating solvent in boiling ﬂask.

6. Dry boiling ﬂask with extracted fat in an air
C for 30 min, cool in desiccator, and

◦

oven at 100
weigh.

Soxhlet extraction apparatus.

8-2
f i g u r e

8.3.4.4 Calculation

% Fat on dry weight basis

= (g of fat in sample/g of dried sample) × 100 [3]

8.3.5 Discontinuous Solvent Extraction
Methods
8.3.5.1 MojonnierMethod
8.3.5.1.1 Principle and Characteristics Fat is extra-
cted with a mixture of ethyl ether and petroleum ether
in a Mojonnier ﬂask, and the extracted fat is dried
to a constant weight and expressed as percent fat by
weight.

The Mojonnier test is an example of the discontin-
uous solvent extraction method and does not require
removal of moisture from the sample. It can be applied
to both liquid and solid samples. If petroleum ether is
used to purify the extracted fat, this method is very
similar to the Roese-Gottlieb Method (AOAC Method
905.02) in both principle and practice. The Mojonnier
ﬂasks (Fig. 8-3) are used not only for the Mojonnier and
Roese-Gottlieb methods, but also to do the hydrolysis
(acid, alkaline, or combination) prior to fat extraction
and GC analysis to determine fat content and fatty acid
proﬁle (Sect. 8.3.6). (Note that sometimes the terms
Mojonnier, Roese Gottlieb, and alkaline hydrolysis are
used interchangeably.)

124

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

The Mojonnier method was developed for and
is applied primarily to dairy foods (procedure as
described below for milk fat), but is applicable to other
foods. Speciﬁcally, methods for fat in ﬂour (AOAC
Method 922.06) and fat in pet food (AOAC Method
954.02) both involve an acid hydrolysis with HCl, fol-
lowed by extraction with a combination of ethyl ether
and petroleum ether as described in AOAC Method
989.05 below for milk fat.

8.3.5.1.2 Procedure:MilkFatMethod(AOACMethod
989.05)

◦

1. Preparation of Sample. Bring the sample to
about 20
C; mix to prepare a homogeneous
sample by pouring back and forth between
clean beakers. Promptly weigh or measure the
test portion. If lumps of cream do not disperse,
warm the sample in a water bath to about 38
C
and keep mixing until it is homogeneous, using
a “rubber policeman” if necessary to reincor-
porate the cream adhering to the container or
stopper. When it can be done without inter-
fering with dispersal of the fat, cool warmed
samples to about 20
C before transferring the
test portion.

◦

◦

2. Procedure
(a) Weigh,

to the nearest 0.1 mg,

10 g of
milk into a Mojonnier fat extraction ﬂask
(Fig. 8-3).

(b) Add 1.5 ml of NH4OH and shake vigor-
ously. Add 2 ml
if the sample is sour.
NH4OH neutralizes the acidic sample and
dissolves protein.

(c) Add 10 ml of 95% ethanol and shake for
90 s. The alcohol prevents possible gel for-
mation.

8-3
f i g u r e

Mojonnier fat extraction ﬂask. (Courtesy of
Kontes Glass Co., Vineland, NJ.)

(d) Add 25 ml of ethyl ether and shake for 90 s.

The ether dissolves the lipid.

(e) Cool

if necessary,

and add 25 ml of
petroleum ether and shake for 90 s. The
petroleum ether removes moisture from
the ethyl ether extract and dissolves more
nonpolar lipid.

(f) Centrifuge for 30 s at 600 rpm.
(g) Decant ether solution from the Mojonnier
ﬂask into the previously weighed Mojon-
nier fat dish.

(h) Perform second and third extractions in
the same manner as for the ﬁrst extraction
described previously (ethanol, ethyl ether,
petroleum ether, centrifugation, decant).
electric hot plate at ≤100
◦

(i) Evaporate the solvent in the dish on the

(j) Dry the dish and fat to a constant weight in

◦
C in a hood.
C ± 1

a forced air oven at 100

C.

◦

(k) Cool the dish to room temperature and

weigh.

3. Calculations

% Fat = 100 × {[(wt dish + fat) − (wt dish)]
−(avg wt blank residue)}/wt sample
[4]

A pair of reagent blanks must be prepared every
day. For reagent blank determination, use 10 ml of
distilled water instead of milk sample. The reagent
blank should be <0.002 g. Duplicate analyses should
be <0.03% fat.

8.3.5.2 Chloroform–MethanolProcedure
8.3.5.2.1 Principle and Characteristics The combi-
nation of chloroform and methanol has been used
commonly to extract lipids. The “Folch extraction” (9)
applied to small samples, and the “Bligh and Dyer
extraction” (10) applied to large samples of high mois-
ture content, both utilize this combination of solvents
to recover lipids from foods. These methods have
been reviewed and procedures modiﬁed by Christie
(11) and others. The Bligh and Dyer procedure (10)
is a modiﬁcation of the Folch extraction (9), designed
for more efﬁcient solvent usage for low-fat samples.
The Christie modiﬁcation (11) of these former meth-
ods replaced water with 0.88% potassium chloride
aqueous solution to create two phases.

In both the modiﬁed Folch extraction and
Bligh and Dyer procedure,
food samples are
mixed/homogenized in a chloroform–methanol solu-
tion, and the homogenized mixture is ﬁltered into a
collection tube. A 0.88% potassium chloride aqueous
solution is added to the chloroform–methanol mixture

Chapter 8 • Fat Analysis

125

containing the extracted fats. This causes the solution
to break into two phases: the aqueous phase (top)
and the chloroform phase containing the lipid (bot-
tom). The phases are further separated in a separatory
funnel or by centrifugation. After evaporation of the
chloroform, the fat can be quantitated by weight.

The various methanol–chloroform extraction pro-
cedures are rapid, well suited to low-fat samples, and
can be used to generate lipid samples for subsequent
fatty acid compositional analysis. The procedure has
been more applied to basic commodities, rather than
to ﬁnished product samples. For consistent results, the
procedures must be followed carefully, including the
ratio of chloroform and methanol. A cautionary note is
that chloroform and methanol are highly toxic, so the
extraction procedure must be done in well-ventilated
areas.

8.3.5.2.2 Procedure(ModiﬁedFolchExtraction)
(9,11)

methods (acidic hydrolysis for most products, alka-
line hydrolysis for dairy products, and combination
for cheese). Pyrogallic acid is added to minimize
oxidative degradation of fatty acids during analy-
sis. Triglyceride, triundecanoin (C11:0), is added as
internal standard. Fat is extracted into ether,
then
methylated to fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) using
BF3 (boron triﬂuoride) in methanol. FAMEs are quan-
titatively measured by capillary gas chromatography
(GC) against C11:0 internal standard. Total fat is cal-
culated as sum of individual fatty acids expressed as
triglyceride equivalents. Saturated and monounsatu-
rated fats are calculated as sum of respective fatty
acids. Monounsaturated fat includes only cis form.”
Trans fat can be quantiﬁed utilizing this method in
conjunction with identiﬁcation criteria established by
the American Association of Oil Chemists (AOCS
Method Ce 1h-05) (12) and Golay et al. (13).

1. Weigh 1 g accurately and homogenize 1 min in

2. Add 20 ml of chloroform and homogenize for

10 ml of methanol.

2 min.

3. Filter on a Buchner funnel and reextract cake
and ﬁlter paper with 20 ml of chloroform plus
10 ml methanol.

4. Filter and combine two ﬁltrates. Measure vol-
ume. Calculate 25% of the total volume and
add this amount of 0.88% KCl. Let separate in a
separatory funnel.

5. Remove the lower lipid-containing layer and
measure the volume. Calculate 25% of the vol-
ume and add this volume of water to wash the
sample.

6. Remove water from the sample by adding
sodium sulfate. Filter to separate sample from
hydrated sodium sulfate. Use chloroform to
wash the sodium sulfate on the ﬁlter paper.

7. Place the chloroform–lipid solution in a
weighed round bottom ﬂask and remove chlo-
roform from the lipid using a rotary evaporator
with water temperature below 50
(If the
extract is cloudy, add 20 ml of acetone and
20 ml of chloroform and reevaporate.) Weigh
the ﬂask to determine the % lipid in the sample.

C.

◦

8.3.6 Total Fat by GC for Nutrition Labeling
(AOAC Method 996.06)
8.3.6.1 Principle
AOAC International (8) gives an excellent descrip-
tion of the principle of AOAC Method 996.06: “Fat
and fatty acids are extracted from food by hydrolytic

8.3.6.2 SamplePreparationProcedures
Samples are methylated by either a standard or alter-
native method (Fig. 8-4) to form the FAMEs prior to
GC analysis. In both methods, the sample is com-
bined with a speciﬁed amount of the internal standard
triglyceride, triundecanoin.

Most foods and 100% fat products can be subjected
to the standard sample preparation procedure. Before
using the standard method, unless the sample is 100%
fat,
it is subjected to the appropriate fat extraction
procedure (including, but not limited to, acid hydroly-
sis, alkaline hydrolysis, and Soxhlet extraction). Before
any samples are subjected to acid or alkaline hydrol-
ysis, 1.0 ml of triundecanoin internal standard solu-
tion is added to the sample. In the case of a sample
extracted by the Soxhlet method, or if the sample
is 100% fat, 1.0 ml of the internal standard is added
directly to the ﬂask used as the sample is methylated.
Extracted samples can be stored refrigerated (5± 3
C),
with hexane added, for up to 2 weeks if methylation
will not be done immediately. (The hexane is dried
off on a steam bath with a gentle stream of nitro-
gen before the sample is weighed and methylation
occurs.)

◦

The alternative sample preparation method is efﬁ-
cient for infant formulas and other similar matrices
containing short chain fatty acids (e.g., butyric acid)
and long chain fatty acids (e.g., eicosapentaenoic or
docosahexaenoic acids) and for products containing
microencapsulated fatty acids. This alternative pro-
cedure provides for more thorough recovery of short
chain fatty acids, such as butyric acid, and eliminates
the preliminary fat extraction step,
thereby saving
time.

126

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

Standard Sample Preparation Procedure:

1. For oil samples (100% lipid) or samples that were extracted by the Soxhlet method, accurately weigh a portion of the lipid (usually
0.15–0.2 g) into a 125-ml, or 50-ml, round bottom ﬂask, containing the internal standard. For low lipid amounts, the lipid may be
transferred into the ﬂask using hexane. The weight of lipid is the difference in the weight of the empty ﬂask and the weight of the
ﬂask after the hexane is evaporated on a steam both under a gentle stream of nitrogen.

2. Add 4–5 ml of 0.5 N sodium hydroxide (NaOH) in methanol (MeOH), then a few boiling chips.
3. Attach a water-cooled condenser and reﬂux on a boiling steam bath for ∼15 min.
4. Add 5 ml of boron triﬂuoride (BF3): methanol (MeOH) (14%, w/v) through the top of the condenser.
5. Reﬂux for ∼5 min.
6. Add an appropriate amount of heptane, usually 10 ml.
7. Reﬂux for ∼1 min.
8. Raise the round bottom ﬂask still attached to the condenser above the steam bath and let it cool for ∼15 min. Disconnect the

condensers.

9. Add 2–3 ml of saturated sodium chloride (NaCl) solution to the ﬂask and stopper the ﬂask.
10. Let stand until it reaches room temperature (∼15 min).
11. Add saturated NaCl solution so that the heptane layer will ﬂoat in the neck of the ﬂask.
12. Place a small scoop of sodium sulfate in a vial.
13. Transfer the heptane layer containing the methyl esters into the vial and place the screw cap on the vial. (Sample is stable for 2 wk)
14. Inject an appropriate amount of the heptane layer into the GC system.

Alternative Sample Preparation Procedure:

Note: Samples with butryric and caproic acids (typically found in matrices containing dairy products) are treated differently after Step
8 than those without. Step 9 provides direction concerning this.

1. For a ﬁnal volume of 5 ml (usually samples with less than 10% fat, or known to have low concentrations of the fatty acids of
interest), add 1.0 ml of the tridecanoic tritridecanoin internal standard to a 50-ml round-bottom ﬂask. If a ﬁnal volume of 10 ml
is used (usually samples known to contain more than 10% fat), add 2.0 ml of the tritridecanoic tritridecanoin internal standard.
Evaporate the solvent on a steambath under a gentle stream of nitrogen until dry. Let the ﬂask cool to room temperature.

2. Accurately weigh an appropriate amount of sample (depending on the amount of lipid in the sample) into the round-bottom ﬂask.
3. Add approximately 6 ml of the 0.5 N NaOH in MeOH solution and a magnetic stir bar to the round-bottom ﬂask.
4. Attach the ﬂask to a condenser and reﬂux the solution for 1–2 hr on a heating stirplate.
5. Dry moist samples or powder samples under a gentle nitrogen stream without heat to avoid bumping. Liquid samples may be

dried on a steam bath with a gentle nitrogen stream.

◦

6. Place the ﬂask in an oven set to maintain 100

C to dry completely for (usually 20–30 min) (cover samples that splatter in oven).

Cool to room temperature. At this point, the samples may be covered and left at room temperature overnight (6–12 hr).

7. Add approximately 5 ml MeOH and a few boiling chips to the round-bottom ﬂask. Connect the ﬂask to condensers over a

steambath.

8. Bring the samples to a boil and add approximately 5 ml of BF3 in MeOH (14% w/v) through the condenser.
9. For samples not containing butyric and caproic acids skip to Step 11; samples containing butyric and caproic acid continue to Step

10. Methylation of fatty acids including butyric and caproic acids.

10.
10.1. Continue to reﬂux the sample for ∼1 min.
10.2. Raise the sample above the steam bath and add an appropriate amount of methylene chloride [either 5.0 or 10.0 ml depending

on the amount (1 or 2 ml, respectively) of tridecanoic tritridecanoin internal standard added in Step 1].

10.3. Place the ﬂask in a cup containing ice chips to quickly cool the sample, while still leaving it attached to the condenser and let

sample cool.

10.4. Remove ﬂask from condenser and add 5–20 ml saturated NaCl solution. Stopper and shake.
10.5. Transfer contents of ﬂask to a 50-ml glass centrifuge tube and centrifuge to achieve separation of the methylene chloride.
10.6. Continue as speciﬁed in Steps 11–14 of the Standard Sample Preparation section, replacing heptane with methylene chloride.

The methylene chloride layer will be the lower layer.

11. Methylation of fatty acids excluding butyric and caproic acids.

11.1. Continue to reﬂux the sample for ∼2–5 min.
11.2. Add an appropriate amount of heptane through the condenser [either 5 or 10 ml, depending on the amount (1 or 2 ml,

respectively) of tridecanoic tritridecnoin internal standard added in Step 1]. Continue to reﬂux the solution for ∼1 min.

11.3. Continue as speciﬁed in Steps 9–14 of the Standard Sample Preparation section.

8-4
f i g u r e

Standard and alternative procedures to methylate samples prior to gas chromatographic analysis for fatty acid
composition.

Chapter 8 • Fat Analysis

127

8.3.6.3 ChromatographicConditions
The following are two sets of conditions that might
be used, but conditions may be modiﬁed as needed
to optimize separation. Electronic pressure control of
gases may be used.
Any 0.25 mm ID × 100 m long,
0.20 μ m ﬁlm thickness 100%
biscyanopropanol
(nonbonded) capillary
column such as SP-2560,
HP-88, CP-Sil 88, etc.
◦
C, hold 11.10 min;

Column

Column

170
increase 7.9

◦

C/min to 200

C,

temperature

Injection port
temperature

Detector

temperature

Carrier gas

(hydrogen) ﬂow

Split ratio
Hydrogen ﬂow
Air ﬂow
Makeup gas ﬂow
OR
Column

Column

temperature

◦

◦

C,

hold 1.27 min;

◦

increase 7.9

C/min to 210

hold 16 min
◦

250

C

◦

C

300

1.2 ml/min (26 cm/s)

100:1
30 ml/min
300 ml/min
30 ml/min

Any 0.25 mm ID × 100 m long,
0.20 μ m ﬁlm thickness 100%
cyanopropanol capillary
column such as SP-2560,
HP-88, CP-Sil 88, etc.
◦

C, hold 5.0 min;

170
increase 2.0

◦

◦

C/min to 190
◦

C/min to 210

C,
◦

C,

hold 5.0 min;

increase 10.0

hold 5.0 min;

◦
increase 10.0
hold 9 min

C/min to 230

◦

C,

8.3.6.4 Calculations
Calculations can be made by peak height or by inte-
grated area (Fig. 8-5; Table 8-4). Fatty acids may be
calculated as triglycerides, methyl esters, ethyl esters,
or acids. Use a current validated computer soft-
ware (e.g., Waters Empower Chromatography Man-
ager, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) to perform
calculations, entering data for sample weight (mg) and
ﬁnal volume (ml).

% Fatty acid on a lipid basis
= mg/mg of fatty acid × 100

[5]

or

% Fatty acids on a sample basis
= mg/mg of fatty acid × % lipid

[6]
Alternative calculations can be made using peak areas
obtained from current validated computer software.
Calculate the response factor (RF) for each standard
(by dividing the peak area by the internal standard
area) and the standard factor (F) (by dividing the
response factor by the internal standard concentra-
tion, mg/ml). Measure the peak area of each respective
fatty acid and the internal standard, then calculate the
sample response factor (SRF) by dividing the sample
fatty acid peak area by the internal standard peak area.
× 100
% Fatty acid = SRF
F
[7]

× ﬁnal sample volume (ml)

sample weight (mg)

where:

SRF = sample response factor

F = standard factor

8.4 NONSOLVENT WET EXTRACTION
METHODS

8.4.1 Babcock Method for Milk Fat (AOAC
Method 989.04 and 989.10)
8.4.1.1 Principle
In the Babcock method, H2SO4 is added to a known
amount of milk in the Babcock bottle. The sulfuric acid
digests protein, generates heat, and releases the fat.
Centrifugation and hot water addition isolate fat for
quantiﬁcation in the graduated portion of the test bot-
tle. The fat is measured volumetrically, but the result
is expressed as percent fat by weight.

8.4.1.2 Procedure

1. Accurately pipette the milk sample (17.6 ml)

into a Babcock test bottle (Fig. 8-6).

2. Add reagent grade (1.82 speciﬁc gravity) sulfu-
ric acid (17.5 ml) to the bottle, allowing the acid
to ﬂow gently down the neck of the bottle as it is
being slowly rotated. The acid digests proteins
to liberate the fat.

3. Centrifuge the mixture for 5 min and liquid fat
will rise into the calibrated bottle neck. The
centrifuge must be kept at 55–60
C during cen-
trifugation.

◦

4. Add hot water to bring liquid fat up into the

graduated neck of the Babcock bottle.

5. The direct percentage of fat by weight is read to
the nearest 0.05% from the graduation mark of
the bottle.

128

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

Auto-Scaled Chromatogram

60.00

55.00

50.00

45.00

40.00

35.00

30.00

25.00

20.00

15.00

10.00

A
p

i

c
o
n
a
c
e
d
a
x
e
H

i

c
o
n
e
c
e
d
a
x
e
H

-
t

9

i

c
o
n
e
c
e
d
a

t

n
e
P
-
c
0
1

i

c
o
n
e
c
e
d
a
x
e
H
-
c
9

i

c
o
n
a
c
e
d
a
p
e
H

t

i

c
o
n
e
c
e
d
a

t
c
O
-
c
9

i

c
o
n
e
c
e
d
a

t
c
O

-
t

9

i

c
o
n
a
c
e
d
a
t
c
O

i

c
o
n
e
c
e
d
a

t

p
e
H
-
c
0
1

i

c
o
n
a
c
e
d
o
D

i

c
o
n
a
c
e
d
i
r
T

i

c
o
n
a
c
e
d
a
r
t

e
T

i

c
o
n
a
c
e
d
a

t

n
e
P

i

c
o
n
e
c
e
d
a
r
t

e
T
-
c
9

d
r
a
d
n
a
S

t

 
l

a
n
r
e
n

t

I

i

c
o
n
a
c
e
D

i

c
o
n
a

t
c
O

i

c
o
n
a
x
e
H

i

c
o
n
a
r
t

e
T

i

t

c
o
n
e
a
n
e
p
a
s
o
c
E
 
c
7
1
4
1

,

i

,

1
1

,

8
5

,

i

c
o
n
a
s
o
c
a
r
t

e
T

i

c
o
n
e
s
o
c
a
r
t

e
T
-
c
5
1

i

t

c
o
n
e
a
n
e
p
a
s
o
c
o
D
c
9
1

,

6
1

,

3
1

,

0
1

,

7

i

c
o
n
e
a
x
e
h
a
s
o
c
o
D
9
1
6
1
3
1
0
1
7

,

,

,

,

,

4

i

c
o
n
e
a
r
t

t

e
a
c
e
d
a

t
c
O
 
c
5
1
2
1
9

,

,

,

6

i

i

c
o
n
e
d
a
s
o
c
E
-
c
4
1

i

 
,
c
1
1

i

c
o
n
a
s
o
c
o
D

i

c
o
n
e
s
o
c
o
D
-
c
3
1

i

c
o
n
e
a
r
t

i

t

e
a
s
o
c
E
-
c
4
1
1
1
8

,

,

,

5

i

c
o
n
e
i
r
t

i

a
s
o
c
E
-
c
7
1

,
c
4
1

,
c
1
1

i

i

c
o
n
e
d
a
c
e
d
a

t
c
O
 
c
2
1

 
,
c
9

i

c
o
n
e
i
r
t

a
c
e
d
a

i

i

c
o
n
e
d
a
c
e
d
a

t
c
O

 
t

2
1

,
t

9

i

c
o
n
e
i
r
t
a
c
e
d
a

t
c
O
-
c
5
1

,
c
2
1

,
c
9

i

c
o
n
a
s
o
c
E

i

t
c
O
 
c
2
1

,
c
9

,
c
6

i

c
o
n
e
s
o
c
E
-
c
1
1

i

8.00

10.00

12.00

14.00

16.00

18.00

20.00

24.00

22.00
Minutes

26.00

28.00

30.00

32.00

34.00

36.00

38.00

Example of chromatogram from gas chromatography analysis.

Fatty Acid Conversion Table

8-5
f i g u r e

8-4
table

FattyAcida

Acid

Methyl
Ester

Triglyceride

Triglyceride

1/3

Triglyceride/
MethylEster

Acid/Methyl

Ester

Acid/

Triglyceride

MolecularWeight

ConversionFactorsb

4:0 Butyric
Tetranoic
5:0 Valeric

Pentanoic
6:0 Caproic
Hexanoic

7:0 Heptanoic
8:0 Caprylic
Octanoic
10:0 Capric
Decanoic
12:0 Lauric

Dodecanoic

13:0 Tridecanoic

88.11

102.14

102.40

116.43

116.16

130.19

130.19
144.21

144.22
158.24

172.27

186.30

200.35

214.38

214.35

228.38

302.38

345.25

386.53

428.62
470.69

554.85

639.02

681.10

100.79

115.08

128.84

142.87
156.90

184.95

213.01

227.03

0.9868

0.9885

0.9897

0.9907
0.9915

0.9928

0.9937

0.9941

0.8627

0.8795

0.8923

0.9027
0.9114

0.9247

0.9346

0.9386

0.8742

0.8898

0.9016

0.9112
0.9192

0.9314

0.9405

0.9441

(continued)

Chapter 8 • Fat Analysis

8-4
table

Fatty Acid Conversion Table (continued)

MolecularWeight

ConversionFactorsb

FattyAcida

Acid

Methyl
Ester Triglyceride Triglyceride MethylEster

1/3

Triglyceride/ Acid/Methyl

129

Acid/

14:0 Myristic

Tetradecanoic
14:1 Myristoleic

9-Tetradecenoic

15:0 Pentadecanoic
15:1 Pentadecenoic
10-Pentadecenoic

16:0 Palmitic
Hexadecanoic
16:1 Palmitoleic

9-Hexadecenoic

17:0 Heptadecanoic
17:1 Heptadecenoic
10-Heptadecenoic

18:0 Stearic
Octadecanoic
18:1 Oleic

9-Octadecenoic

18:2 Linoleic

9-12 Octadecadienoic

18:3 Gamma Linolenic

6-9-12 Octadecatrienoic

18:3 Linolenic

9-12-15 Octadecatrienoic

18:4 Octadecatetraenoic

6-9-12-15 Octadecatetraenoic

20:0 Arachidic
Eicosanoic

20:1 Eicosenoic
11-Eicosenoic

20:2 Eicosadienoic

11-14 Eicosadienoic

20:3 Eicosatrienoic

11-14-17 Eicosatrienoic

20:4 Arachidonic

5-8-11-14 Eicosatetraenoic

20:5 Eicosapentaenoic

5-8-11-14-17 Eicosapenatenoic

22:0 Behenic
Docosanoic

22:1 Erucic

13-Docosenoic

22:5 Docosapentaenoic

7-10-13-1619 Docosapentaenoic

22:6 Docosahexaenoic

4-7-10-13-16-19 Docosahexaenoic

24:0 Lignoceric
Tetracosanoic

24:1 Nervonic

15-Tetracosenoic

228.38

242.41

723.18

241.06

226.38

240.41

717.18

239.06

242.41
240.40

256.44
254.43

765.26
759.26

255.09
253.09

256.43

270.46

807.34

269.11

254.43

268.46

801.46

267.11

270.48
268.48

284.51
282.51

849.42
843.42

283.14
281.14

284.48

298.51

891.50

297.17

282.48

296.51

885.50

295.17

280.48

294.51

879.50

293.17

278.48

292.51

873.50

291.17

278.48

292.51

873.50

291.17

276.48

290.51

867.50

289.17

312.54

326.57

975.66

325.22

310.54

324.57

969.66

323.22

308.53

322.56

963.66

321.22

306.53

320.56

957.66

319.22

304.52

318.55

951.66

317.22

302.52

316.55

945.66

315.22

340.59

354.62

1,059.82

353.27

338.59

352.63

1,053.82

351.27

330.50

344.53

1,029.55

343.18

328.57

342.60

1,023.82

341.27

368.64

382.67

1,143.98

381.33

366.63

380.66

1,137.98

379.33

0.9945

0.9944

0.9948
0.9947

0.9950

0.9950

0.9953
0.9952

0.9955

0.9955

0.9954

0.9954

0.9954

0.9954

0.9959

0.9959

0.9958

0.9958

0.9958

0.9958

0.9962

0.9962

0.9961

0.9961

0.9965

0.9965

Ester

Triglyceride

0.9421

0.9417

0.9453
0.9449

0.9481

0.9477

0.9507
0.9503

0.9530

0.9527

0.9524

0.9520

0.9520

0.9517

0.9570

0.9568

0.9565

0.9562

0.9560

0.9557

0.9604

0.9602

0.9593

0.9591

0.9633

0.9632

0.9474

0.9469

0.9503
0.9499

0.9529

0.9525

0.9552
0.9549

0.9573

0.9570

0.9567

0.9564

0.9564

0.9561

0.9610

0.9608

0.9605

0.9603

0.9600

0.9598

0.9641

0.9639

0.9630

0.9628

0.9667

0.9666

aTop number indicates carbon chain length and degree of unsaturation. Bottom number(s) indicate position of double bond(s) on the carbon
chain.
bConversion factors: To convert methyl ester to triglyceride: multiply by T/M ratio; To convert methyl ester to acid: multiply by A/M ratio; To convert
triglyceride to acid: multiply by A/T ratio; To convert tridecanoic to methyl ester: multiply by 1.065 or divide by A/M ratio.

130

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

4. Tighten the stopper and mix by shaking the

bottle.

5. Centrifuge the bottle for 4 min.
6. Place the bottle in a water bath at 60–63

C for
5 min and then read the fat content from the
graduations on the bottle neck.

◦

8.4.2.3 Applications
The Gerber method is comparable to the Babcock
method but is simpler and faster and has wider appli-
cation to a variety of dairy products (14). The isoamyl
alcohol generally prevents the charring of sugar found
with the regular Babcock method. This test is more
popular in Europe than in America.

8.5 INSTRUMENTAL METHODS

In general,

Instrumental methods offer numerous attractive fea-
tures compared with the previously described extrac-
tion methods.
they are rapid, nonde-
structive, and require minimal sample preparation
and chemical consumption. However, the equipment
can be expensive and measurements often require the
establishment of calibration curves speciﬁc to vari-
ous compositions. Despite these drawbacks, several of
the following instrumental methods are very widely
used in quality control as well as research and prod-
uct development applications. The following section
describes several of these instrumental methods.

8.5.1 Infrared Method
The infrared (IR) method is based on absorption of IR
energy by fat at a wavelength of 5.73 μ m. The more
the energy absorption at 5.73 μ m, the higher is the
fat content of the sample (15). Mid-IR spectroscopy is
used in Infrared Milk Analyzers to determine milk fat
content (AOAC Method 972.16). Near-infrared (NIR)
spectroscopy has been used to measure the fat content
of commodities such as meats, cereals, and oilseeds
in the laboratory and is being adapted for on-line
measurement. See Chap. 23 for a discussion of IR
spectroscopy.

8.5.2 Speciﬁc Gravity (Foss-Let Method)
Fat content by the Foss-Let method (Foss North Amer-
ica, Eden Prairie, MN) is determined as a function
of the speciﬁc gravity of a sample solvent extract.
A sample of known weight is extracted for 1.5–2 min
in a vibration-reaction chamber with perchloroethy-
lene. The extract is ﬁltered, and using a thermostati-
cally controlled device with digital readout, its speciﬁc

8-6
f i g u r e

Babcock milk test bottles for milk (a), cream
(b), and cheese (Paley bottle) (c) testing. (Cour-
tesy of Kimble Glass Co., Vineland, NJ.)

8.4.1.3 Applications
The Babcock method, which is a common ofﬁcial
method for the determination of fat in milk, takes
about 45 min and duplicate tests should agree within
0.1%. The Babcock method does not determine the
phospholipids in the milk products. It is not applicable
to products containing chocolate or added sugar with-
out modiﬁcation because of charring of chocolate and
sugars by sulfuric acid. A modiﬁed Babcock method
is used to determine essential oil in ﬂavor extracts
(AOAC Method 932.11) and fat in seafood (AOAC
Method 964.12).

8.4.2 Gerber Method for Milk Fat
8.4.2.1 Principle
The principle of the Gerber method is similar to that of
the Babcock method, but it uses sulfuric acid and amyl
alcohol. The sulfuric acid digests proteins and carbo-
hydrates, releases fat, and maintains the fat in a liquid
state by generating heat.

8.4.2.2 Procedure

1. Transfer 10 ml of H2SO4 at 15–21

Gerber milk bottle.

2. Accurately measure milk sample (11 ml) into

the Gerber bottle, using a Gerber pipette.
3. Add 1 ml of isoamyl alcohol to the bottle.

◦

C into a

Chapter 8 • Fat Analysis

131

gravity is determined. The reading can then be con-
verted to oil or fat percentage using a conversion
chart.

8.5.3 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) can be used to
measure lipids in food materials in a nondestructive
way. It is one of the most popular methods for use
in determining lipid melting curves to measure solid
fat content (see Chap. 14), and with more affordable
instruments is becoming more popular for measuring
total fat content. Total fat content can be measured
using low-resolution pulsed NMR. The principles and
applications of NMR are described in Chap. 25. NMR
analysis is a very rapid and accurate method, and
while the principles of NMR are relatively complex,
the use of NMR can be quite simple, especially due to
the high degree of automation and computer control.

8.6 COMPARISON OF METHODS

Soxhlet extraction or its modiﬁed method is a com-
mon crude fat determination method in many food
commodities. However, this method requires a dried
sample for the hydroscopic ethyl ether extraction. If
the samples are moist or liquid foods, the Mojon-
nier method is generally applicable to determination
of the fat content. Acid hydrolysis or alkaline hydrol-
ysis is widely used on many ﬁnished food products.
The instrumental methods such as IR and NMR are
very simple, reproducible, and fast, but are available
only for fat determination for speciﬁc foods. The appli-
cation of instrumental methods for fat determination
generally requires a standard curve between the signal
of the instrument analysis and the fat content obtained
by a standard solvent extraction method. However, a
rapid instrumental method could be used as a quality
control method for fat determination of a speciﬁc food.
Major uses of the Goldﬁsh, Soxhlet, and Mojonnier
(or Roese-Gottlieb) methods include the following: (1)
extract fat prior to GC analysis, (2) quality control of
formulated products, (3) determine fat content dur-
ing product development, (4) verify when fat content
is <0.5 g per serving (so nutrient content claim can
be made), and (5) defat samples prior to ﬁber anal-
ysis. Compared with GC analysis of fat content by
AOAC Method 996.06, these three methods are faster
and cheaper, but give a higher fat content (which must
be recognized when using these methods for product
development).

8.7 SUMMARY

Lipids are generally deﬁned by their solubility charac-
teristics rather than by some common structural fea-
ture. Lipids in foods can be classiﬁed as simple, com-
pound, or derived lipids. The lipid content of foods
varies widely, but quantitation is important because
of regulatory requirements, nutritive value, and func-
tional properties. To analyze food for the fat content
accurately and precisely, it is essential to have a com-
prehensive knowledge of the general compositions
of the lipids in the foods, the physical and chemi-
cal properties of the lipids as well as the foods, and
the principles of fat determination. There is no single
standard method for the determination of fats in dif-
ferent foods. The validity of any fat analysis depends
on proper sampling and preservation of the sample
prior to analysis. Predrying of the sample, particle size
reduction, and acid hydrolysis prior to analysis also
may be necessary. The total lipid content of foods is
commonly determined by organic solvent extraction
methods, which can be classiﬁed as continuous (e.g.,
Goldﬁsh), semicontinuous (e.g., Soxhlet), discontin-
uous (e.g., Mojonnier, Folch), or by GC analysis for
nutrition labeling. Nonsolvent wet extraction meth-
ods, such as the Babcock or Gerber, are commonly
used for certain types of food products. Instrumen-
tal methods, such as NMR, infrared, and Foss-Let, are
also available for fat determination of speciﬁc foods.
These methods are rapid and so may be useful for
quality control but generally require correlation to a
standard solvent extraction method.

8.8 STUDY QUESTIONS

1. What are some important considerations when selecting
solvents to be used in continuous and noncontinuous
solvent extraction methods?

2. To extract the fat from a food sample, you have the choice
of using ethyl ether or petroleum ether as the solvent,
and you can use either a Soxhlet or a Goldﬁsh appara-
tus. What combination of solvent and extraction would
you choose? Give all the reasons for your choice.

3. Itemize the procedures that may be required to prepare a
food sample for accurate fat determination by a solvent
extraction method (e.g., Soxhlet method). Explain why
each of these procedures may be necessary.

4. You performed fat analysis on a new superenergy shake
(high carbohydrate and protein) using standard Soxh-
let extraction. The value obtained for fat content was
much lower than that expected. What could have caused
the measured fat content to be low and how would you
modify the standard procedure to correct the problem?

132

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

5. What is the purpose of the following chemicals used in

the Mojonnier method?
(a) Ammonium hydroxide
(b) Ethanol
(c) Ethyl ether
(d) Petroleum ether

6. What is a key application of the GC method and what

does it speciﬁcally quantify?

7. What is the purpose of the following procedures used in

Babcock method?
(a) Sulfuric acid addition
(b) Centrifugation and addition of hot water

8. Which of the following methods are volumetric and
which are gravimetric determinations of lipid content:
Babcock, Soxhlet, Mojonnier, Gerber?

9. Explain and contrast the principles (not procedures)
involved in determining the fat content of a food product
by the following methods. Indicate for each method the
type of sample and application that would be appropriate
for analysis.
(a) Soxhlet
(b) Babcock
(c) Mojonnier
(d) GC analysis

8.9 PRACTICE PROBLEMS

1. To determine the fat content of a semimoist food by the
Soxhlet method, the food was ﬁrst vacuum oven dried.
The moisture content of the product was 25%. The fat in
the dried food was determined by the Soxhlet method.
The fat content of the dried food was 13.5%. Calculate
the fat content of the original semimoist product.

2. The fat content of 10 g of commercial ice cream was
determined by the Mojonnier method. The weights of
extracted fat after the second extraction and the third
extraction were 1.21 g and 1.24 g, respectively. How much
of fat, as a percentage of the total, was extracted during
the third extraction?

Answers

1. If the sample weight of a semimoist food is 10 g and
the moisture content is 25%, the dried weight of the
original food is 7.5 g (10 g × 75% = 7.5 g). If the fat
content of the dried food is 13.5%, the 7.5 g of dried
sample has 1.0125 g fat (7.5 g dried food ×13.5% fat =
1.0125 g fat). The 10 g of semimoist food contains the

same amount of fat, i.e., 1.0125 g. Therefore, the fat
content of the semimoist food is 10.125% (1.0125 g
fat/10 g semimoist food).

2. [(1.24 g–1.21 g)/10 g] × 100 = 0.3%

8.10 REFERENCES

1. O’Keefe SF (1998) Nomenclature and classiﬁcation of
lipids, Chap. 1. In: Akoh CC, Min DB (eds) Food lipids:
chemistry, nutrition and biotechnology. Marcel Dekker,
New York, pp 1–36

2. Belitz HD, Grosch W (1987) Food chemistry. Springer,

Berlin

3. Nawar WW (1996) Lipids, Chap. 5. In: Fennema OR (ed)
Food chemistry, 3rd edn. Marcel Dekker, New York, pp
225–319

4. Patton S, Jensen RG (1976) Biomedical aspects of lacta-

tion. Pergamon, Oxford, p 78

5. Jenness R, Patton S (1959) Principles of dairy chemistry.

Wiley, New York

6. Joslyn MA (1970) Methods in food analysis, 2nd edn.

Academic, New York

7. Pomeranz Y, Meloan CF (1994) Food analysis:

the-
ory and practice, 3rd edn. Van Nostrand Reinhold,
New York

8. AOAC International (2007) Ofﬁcial methods of analysis,
18th edn, 2005; Current through revision 2, 2007 (On-
line). AOAC International, Gaithersburg, MD

9. Folch J, Lees M, Stanley GHS (1957) A simple method for
the isolation and puriﬁcation of total lipids from animal
tissues. J Biol Chem 226:297–509

10. Bligh EG, Dyer WJ (1959) A rapid method of total lipid

extraction and puriﬁcation. Can J Physiol 37:911–917

11. Christie WW (1982) Lipid analysis. Isolation, separation,
identiﬁcation, and structural analysis of lipids, 2nd edn.
Pergamon, Oxford

12. AOCS (2009) Ofﬁcial methods and recommended prac-
tices, 6th edn. American Oil Chemists’ Society, Cham-
paign, IL

13. Golay P-A, Dionisi F, Hug B, Giuffrida F, Destaillats F
(2006) Direct quantiﬁcation of fatty acids in dairy pow-
ders, with special emphasis on trans fatty acid content.
Food Chem 106:115–1120

14. Wehr HM, Frank JF (eds) (2004) Standard methods for
the examination of dairy products, 17th edn. American
Public Health Association, Washington, DC

15. Cronin DA, McKenzie K (1990) A rapid method for the
determination of fat in foodstuffs by infrared spectrom-
etry. Food Chem 35:39–49

9

c h a p t e r

Protein Analysis

SamK.C.Chang
DepartmentofCerealandFoodSciences,NorthDakotaStateUniversity,
Fargo,ND58105,USA
kow.chang@ndsu.edu

9.1 Introduction 135

9.1.1 Classiﬁcation and General

Considerations 135

9.1.2 Importance of Analysis 135
9.1.3 Content in Foods 135

9.2 Methods 135

9.2.1 Kjeldahl Method 136
9.2.1.1 Principle 136
9.2.1.2 Historical Background 136

9.2.1.2.1 Original Method 136
9.2.1.2.2 Improvements 136

9.2.1.3 General Procedures and

Reactions 137
9.2.1.3.1 Sample Preparation 137
9.2.1.3.2 Digestion 137
9.2.1.3.3 Neutralization and

Distillation 137

9.2.1.3.4 Titration 137
9.2.1.3.5 Calculations 137
9.2.1.3.6 Alternate

Procedures 137

9.2.1.4 Applications 138

S.S. Nielsen, Food Analysis, Food Science Texts Series, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1478-1_9,
c(cid:2) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

133

134

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

9.2.2 Dumas (Nitrogen Combustion)

Method 138
9.2.2.1 Principle 138
9.2.2.2 Procedure 138
9.2.2.3 Applications 138

9.2.3 Infrared Spectroscopy 138

9.2.3.1 Principle 138
9.2.3.2 Procedure 138
9.2.3.3 Applications 138

9.2.4 Biuret Method 139

9.2.4.1 Principle 139
9.2.4.2 Procedure 139
9.2.4.3 Applications 139

9.2.5 Lowry Method 139

9.2.5.1 Principle 139
9.2.5.2 Procedure 140
9.2.5.3 Applications 140
9.2.6 Dye-Binding Methods 140

9.2.6.1 Anionic Dye-Binding Method 140

9.2.6.1.1 Principle 140

9.2.6.1.2 Procedure 140
9.2.6.1.3 Applications 140

9.2.6.2 Bradford Dye-Binding Method 141

9.2.6.2.1 Principle 141
9.2.6.2.2 Procedure 141
9.2.6.2.3 Applications 141

9.2.7 Bicinchoninic Acid Method 141

9.2.7.1 Principle 141
9.2.7.2 Procedure 142
9.2.7.3 Applications 142

9.2.8 Ultraviolet 280 nm Absorption Method 142

9.2.8.1 Principle 142
9.2.8.2 Procedure 142
9.2.8.3 Applications 142

9.3 Comparison of Methods 143
9.4 Special Considerations 143
9.5 Summary 144
9.6 Study Questions 144
9.7 Practice Problems 145
9.8 References 146

Chapter 9 • Protein Analysis

9.1 INTRODUCTION

9.1.1 Classiﬁcation and General
Considerations
Proteins are an abundant component in all cells, and
almost all except storage proteins are important for
biological functions and cell structure. Food proteins
are very complex. Many have been puriﬁed and char-
acterized. Proteins vary in molecular mass, ranging
from approximately 5000 to more than a million Dal-
tons. They are composed of elements including hydro-
gen, carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur. Twenty
α-amino acids are the building blocks of proteins; the
amino acid residues in a protein are linked by peptide
bonds. Nitrogen is the most distinguishing element
present in proteins. However, nitrogen content in var-
ious food proteins ranges from 13.4 to 19.1% (1) due to
the variation in the speciﬁc amino acid composition of
proteins. Generally, proteins rich in basic amino acids
contain more nitrogen.

Proteins can be classiﬁed by their composition,
structure, biological function, or solubility properties.
For example, simple proteins contain only amino acids
upon hydrolysis, but conjugated proteins also contain
non-amino-acid components.

Proteins have unique conformations that could be
altered by denaturants such as heat, acid, alkali, 8 M
urea, 6 M guanidine-HCl, organic solvents, and deter-
gents. The solubility as well as functional properties of
proteins could be altered by denaturants.

The analysis of proteins is complicated by the fact
that some food components possess similar physico-
chemical properties. Nonprotein nitrogen could come
from free amino acids, small peptides, nucleic acids,
phospholipids, amino sugars, porphyrin, and some
vitamins, alkaloids, uric acid, urea, and ammonium
ions. Therefore, the total organic nitrogen in foods
would represent nitrogen primarily from proteins and
to a lesser extent from all organic nitrogen-containing
nonprotein substances. Depending upon methodol-
ogy, other major food components, including lipids
and carbohydrates, may interfere physically with anal-
ysis of food proteins.

Numerous methods have been developed to mea-
sure protein content. The basic principles of these
methods include the determinations of nitrogen, pep-
tide bonds, aromatic amino acids, dye-binding capac-
ity, ultraviolet absorptivity of proteins, and light
scattering properties. In addition to factors such as
sensitivity, accuracy, precision, speed, and cost of
analysis, what is actually being measured must be con-
sidered in the selection of an appropriate method for a
particular application.

135

9.1.2 Importance of Analysis
Protein analysis is important for:

1. Nutrition labeling
2. Pricing: The cost of certain commodities is
based on the protein content as measured by
nitrogen content (e.g., cereal grains; milk for
making certain dairy products, e.g., cheese).

3. Functional property investigation: Proteins
in various types of food have unique food
functional properties:
for example, gliadin
and glutenins in wheat ﬂour for breadmak-
ing, casein in milk for coagulation into cheese
products, and egg albumen for foaming (see
Chap. 15).

4. Biological activity determination: Some pro-
teins, including enzymes or enzyme inhibitors,
are relevant to food science and nutrition: for
instance, the proteolytic enzymes in the tender-
ization of meats, pectinases in the ripening of
fruits, and trypsin inhibitors in legume seeds
are proteins. To compare between samples,
enzymes activity often is expressed in terms
of speciﬁc activity, meaning units of enzyme
activity per mg of protein.

Protein analysis is required when you want to know:

1. Total protein content
2. Content of a particular protein in a mixture
3. Protein content during isolation and puriﬁca-

tion of a protein

4. Nonprotein nitrogen
5. Amino acid composition (see Chap. 15)
6. Nutritive value of a protein (see Chap. 15)

9.1.3 Content in Foods
Protein content in food varies widely. Foods of animal
origin and legumes are excellent sources of proteins.
The protein contents of selected food items are listed
in Table 9-1.

9.2 METHODS

Principles, general procedures, and applications are
described below for various protein determination
methods. Refer to the referenced methods for detailed
instructions of the procedures. The Kjeldahl, Dumas
(N combustion), and infrared spectroscopy methods
cited are from the Ofﬁcial Methods of Analysis of AOAC
International (3) and are used commonly in nutri-
tion labeling and quality control. The other methods

136

9-1
table

FoodItem

Protein Content of Selected Foods (2)

Percent
Protein(Wet
WeightBasis)

Cereals and pasta

Rice, brown, long-grain raw
Rice, white, long-grain, regular, raw,
enriched
Wheat ﬂour, whole-grain
Corn ﬂour, whole-grain, yellow
Spaghetti, dry, enriched
Cornstarch
Dairy products

Milk, reduced fat, ﬂuid, 2%
Milk, nonfat, dry, regular, with added
vitamin A
Cheese, cheddar
Yogurt, plain, low fat
Fruits and vegetables
Apple, raw, with skin
Asparagus, raw
Strawberries, raw
Lettuce, iceberg, raw
Potato, whole, ﬂesh and skin

Legumes

Soybeans, mature seeds, raw
Beans, kidney, all types, mature seeds, raw
Tofu, raw, ﬁrm
Tofu, raw, regular
Meats, poultry, ﬁsh

Beef, chuck, arm pot roast
Beef, cured, dried beef
Chicken, broilers or fryers, breast meat

only, raw

Ham, sliced, regular
Egg, raw, whole, fresh
Finﬁsh, cod, Paciﬁc, raw
Finﬁsh, tuna, white, canned in oil, drained

solids

7.9
7.1

13.7
6.9
13.0
0.3

3.2
36.2

24.9
5.3

0.3
2.2
0.7
0.9
2.0

36.5
23.6
15.8
8.1

21.4
31.1
23.1

16.6
12.6
17.9
26.5

From US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service
(2009). USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference.
Release 22. Nutrient Data Laboratory Home Page, http://www.
ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl

described are used commonly in research laboratories
working on proteins. Many of the methods covered in
this chapter are described in somewhat more detail in
recent books on food proteins (4–6).

9.2.1 Kjeldahl Method
9.2.1.1 Principle
In the Kjeldahl procedure, proteins and other organic
food components in a sample are digested with sul-
furic acid in the presence of catalysts. The total
organic nitrogen is converted to ammonium sulfate.

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

The digest is neutralized with alkali and distilled into
a boric acid solution. The borate anions formed are
titrated with standardized acid, which is converted
to nitrogen in the sample. The result of the analy-
sis represents the crude protein content of the food
since nitrogen also comes from nonprotein compo-
nents (note that the Kjeldahl method also measures
nitrogen in any ammonia and ammonium sulfate).

9.2.1.2 HistoricalBackground
9.2.1.2.1 Original Method In 1883, Johann Kjeldahl
developed the basic process of
today’s Kjeldahl
method to analyze organic nitrogen. General steps in
the original method include the following:

1. Digestion with sulfuric acid, with the addition
of powdered potassium permanganate to com-
plete oxidation and conversion of nitrogen to
ammonium sulfate.

2. Neutralization of the diluted digest, followed
by distillation into a known volume of stan-
dard acid, which contains potassium iodide
and iodate.

3. Titration of the liberated iodine with standard

sodium thiosulfate.

9.2.1.2.2 Improvements Several
cations have improved the original Kjeldahl process:

important modiﬁ-

1. Metallic catalysts such as mercury, copper, and
selenium are added to sulfuric acid for com-
plete digestion. Mercury has been found to
be the most satisfactory. Selenium dioxide and
copper sulfate in the ratio of 3:1 have been
reported to be effective for digestion. Copper
and titanium dioxide also have been used as
a mixed catalyst for digestion (AOAC Method
988.05) (3). The use of titanium dioxide and
copper poses less safety concern than mercury
in the postanalysis disposal of the waste.

2. Potassium sulfate is used to increase the boiling
point of the sulfuric acid to accelerate digestion.
3. Sulﬁde or sodium thiosulfate is added to the
diluted digest to help release nitrogen from
mercury, which tends to bind ammonium.

4. The ammonia is distilled directly into a boric
acid solution, followed by titration with stan-
dard acid.

5. Colorimetry Nesslerization, or ion chromatog-
raphy to measure ammonia, is used to deter-
mine nitrogen content after digestion.

An excellent book to review the Kjeldahl method
for total organic nitrogen was written by Bradstreet (7).
The basic AOAC Kjeldahl procedure is Method 955.04.

Chapter 9 • Protein Analysis

137

Semiautomation, automation, and modiﬁcation for
microgram nitrogen determination (micro Kjeldahl
method) have been established by AOAC in Methods
976.06, 976.05, and 960.52, respectively.

9-2
table

Nitrogen to Protein Conversion Factors for
Various Foods

PercentNinProtein

Factor

9.2.1.3 GeneralProceduresandReactions
9.2.1.3.1 Sample Preparation Solid foods are gro-
und to pass a 20-mesh screen. Samples for analysis
should be homogeneous. No other special prepara-
tions are required.

9.2.1.3.2 Digestion Place sample (accurately weigh-
ed) in a Kjeldahl ﬂask. Add acid and catalyst; digest
until clear to get complete breakdown of all organic
matter. Nonvolatile ammonium sulfate is formed from
the reaction of nitrogen and sulfuric acid.

Egg or meat
Milk
Wheat
Corn
Oat
Soybean
Rice

Data from (1, 8).

where:

16.0
15.7
18.76
17.70
18.66
18.12
19.34

6.25
6.38
5.33
5.65
5.36
5.52
5.17

NHCl = normality of HCl,

in mol/1000 ml

−−−−−−−→
Protein Sulfuric acid
Heat, catalyst

(NH4)2SO2

[1]

Corrected acid vol. = (ml std. acid for sample) –

(ml std. acid for blank)

During digestion, protein nitrogen is liberated to form
ammonium ions; sulfuric acid oxidizes organic matter
and combines with ammonium formed; carbon and
hydrogen elements are converted to carbon dioxide
and water.

9.2.1.3.3 NeutralizationandDistillation The digest is
diluted with water. Alkali-containing sodium thio-
sulfate is added to neutralize the sulfuric acid. The
ammonia formed is distilled into a boric acid solution
containing the indicators methylene blue and methyl
red (AOAC Method 991.20).

(NH4)2SO4 + 2NaOH→ 2NH3 + Na2SO4 + 2H2O
[2]
[3]

NH3 + H3BO3 (boric acid) → NH4 + H2BO3

−

(borate ion)

9.2.1.3.4 Titration Borate anion (proportional to the
amount of nitrogen) is titrated with standardized HCl.

H2BO3

− + H+ → H3BO3

[4]

9.2.1.3.5 Calculations

Moles of HCl = moles of NH3

= moles of N in the sample

[5]

A reagent blank should be run to subtract reagent
nitrogen from the sample nitrogen.
% N = N HCl× Corrected acid volume

g of sample

× 14 g N
mol

×100
[6]

14 = atomic weight of nitrogen

A factor is used to convert percent N to percent crude
protein. Most proteins contain 16% N, so the conver-
sion factor is 6.25 (100/16 = 6.25).

% N/0.16 = % protein

[7]

or

% N × 6.25 = % protein

Conversion factors for various foods are given in
Table 9-2.

9.2.1.3.6 Alternate Procedures In place of distilla-
tion and titration with acid, ammonia or nitrogen can
be quantitated by:

1. Nesslerization

4NH4OH + 2HgI2 + 4KI + 3KOH
→ NH2Hg2IO + 7KI + 2H2O

mercuric iodide

ammonium dimercuric iodide,
red-orange, 440 nm

[8]

This method is rapid and sensitive, but the
ammonium dimercuric iodide is colloidal and
color is not stable.
−→
OH

[9]
3. pH measurement after distillation into known

2. NH3 + phenol + hypochloride
− indophenol (blue, 630 nm)

volume of boric acid

4. Direct measurement of ammonia, using ion

chromatographic method

138

9.2.1.4 Applications
Advantages:

1. Applicable to all types of foods
2. Inexpensive (if not using an automated system)
3. Accurate; an ofﬁcial method for crude protein

content

4. Has been modiﬁed (micro Kjeldahl method) to

measure microgram quantities of proteins

Disadvantages:

1. Measures total organic nitrogen, not just pro-

tein nitrogen

2. Time consuming (at least 2 h to complete)
3. Poorer precision than the biuret method
4. Corrosive reagent

◦

9.2.2 Dumas (Nitrogen Combustion) Method
9.2.2.1 Principle
The combustion method was introduced in 1831 by
Jean-Baptiste Dumas. It has been modiﬁed and auto-
mated to improve accuracy since that time. Samples
are combusted at high temperatures (700–1000
C)
with a ﬂow of pure oxygen. All carbon in the sample
is converted to carbon dioxide during the ﬂash com-
bustion. Nitrogen-containing components produced
include N2 and nitrogen oxides. The nitrogen oxides
are reduced to nitrogen in a copper reduction col-
◦
umn at a high temperature (600
C). The total nitrogen
(including inorganic fraction,
including nitrate
i.e.,
and nitrite) released is carried by pure helium and
quantitated by gas chromatography using a thermal
conductivity detector (TCD) (9). Ultra-high purity
acetanilide and EDTA (ethylenediamine tetraacetate)
may be used as the standards for the calibration of
the nitrogen analyzer. The nitrogen determined is con-
verted to protein content in the sample using a protein
conversion factor.

9.2.2.2 Procedure
Samples (approximately 100–500 mg) are weighed into
a tin capsule and introduced to a combustion reac-
tor in automated equipment. The nitrogen released is
measured by a built-in gas chromatograph. Figure 9-1

9-1
f i g u r e

General components of a Dumas nitrogen ana-
lyzer. A, the incinerator; B, copper reduction
unit for converting nitrogen oxides to nitrogen;
and GC, gas chromatography column.

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

shows the ﬂow diagram of the components of a Dumas
nitrogen analyzer.

9.2.2.3 Applications
The combustion method is an alternative to the Kjel-
dahl method (10) and is suitable for all types of foods.
AOAC Method 992.15 and Method 992.23 are for meat
and cereal grains, respectively.
Advantages:

1. Requires no hazardous chemicals.
2. Can be accomplished in 3 min.
3. Recent automated instruments can analyze up

to 150 samples without attention.

Disadvantages:

1. Expensive equipment is required.
2. Measures total organic nitrogen, not just pro-

tein nitrogen.

9.2.3 Infrared Spectroscopy
9.2.3.1 Principle
Infrared spectroscopy measures the absorption of
radiation (near- or mid-infrared regions) by molecules
in food or other substances. Different
functional
groups in a food absorb different frequencies of radia-
tion. For proteins and peptides, various mid-infrared
bands (6.47 μ m) and near-infrared (NIR) bands (e.g.,
3300–3500 nm; 2080–2220 nm; 1560–1670 nm) charac-
teristic of the peptide bond can be used to estimate
the protein content of a food. By irradiating a sam-
ple with a wavelength of infrared light speciﬁc for
the constituent to be measured, it is possible to pre-
dict the concentration of that constituent by measuring
the energy that is reﬂected or transmitted by the sam-
ple (which is inversely proportional to the energy
absorbed) (11).

9.2.3.2 Procedure
See Chap. 23 for a detailed description of instrumen-
tation, sample handling, and calibration and quantita-
tion methodology.

9.2.3.3 Applications
Mid-infrared spectroscopy is used in Infrared Milk
Analyzers to determine milk protein content, while
near-infrared spectroscopy is applicable to a wide
range of food products (e.g., grains; cereal, meat,
and dairy products) (3, 12, 13) (AOAC Method 997.06).
Instruments are expensive and they must be calibrated
properly. However, samples can be analyzed rapidly
(30 s to 2 min) by analysts with minimal training.

Chapter 9 • Protein Analysis

139

AOAC, 10th edn, 1965)] (19). The biuret method also
can be used to measure the protein content of isolated
proteins.
Advantages:

1. Less expensive than the Kjeldahl method; rapid
(can be completed in less than 30 min); simplest
method for analysis of proteins.

2. Color

are

deviations

less
frequently than with Lowry,
ultraviolet
(UV) absorption, or turbidimetric methods
(described below).

encountered

3. Very few substances other than proteins in

foods interfere with the biuret reaction.

4. Does not detect nitrogen from nonpeptide or

nonprotein sources.

Disadvantages:

1. Not very sensitive as compared to the Lowry
method; requires at least 2–4 mg protein for
assay.

2. Absorbance could be contributed from bile pig-

3. High concentration of ammonium salts inter-

ments if present.

fere with the reaction.

4. Color varies with different proteins; gelatin

gives a pinkish-purple color.

5. Opalescence could occur in the ﬁnal solution if
high levels of lipid or carbohydrate are present.
6. Not an absolute method: color must be stan-
dardized against known protein (e.g., BSA) or
against the Kjeldahl nitrogen method.

9.2.5 Lowry Method
9.2.5.1 Principle
The Lowry method (20, 21) combines the biuret reac-
tion with the reduction of the Folin–Ciocalteau phe-
nol reagent (phosphomolybdic-phosphotungstic acid)
by tyrosine and tryptophan residues in the proteins
(Fig. 9-3). The bluish color developed is read at 750 nm
(high sensitivity for low protein concentration) or
500 nm (low sensitivity for high protein concentra-
tion). The original procedure has been modiﬁed by
Miller (22) and Hartree (23) to improve the linearity
of the color response to protein concentration.

a

H2
C

b

H2
C

OH

N
H

9-3
f i g u r e

Side chains of amino acids tyrosine (a) and
tryptophan (b).

Reaction of peptide bonds with cupric ions.

9-2
f i g u r e

9.2.4 Biuret Method
9.2.4.1 Principle
A violet-purplish color is produced when cupric ions
are complexed with peptide bonds (substances con-
taining at least two peptide bonds, i.e., biuret, large
peptides, and all proteins) under alkaline conditions
(Fig. 9-2). The absorbance of the color produced is
read at 540 nm. The color intensity (absorbance) is
proportional to the protein content of the sample (14).

9.2.4.2 Procedure

1. A 5-ml biuret reagent is mixed with a 1-ml por-
tion of protein solution (1–10 mg protein/ml).
The reagent includes copper sulfate, NaOH,
and potassium sodium tartrate, which is used
to stabilize the cupric ion in the alkaline
solution.

2. After the reaction mix is allowed to stand
at room temperature for 15 or 30 min,
the
absorbance is read at 540 nm against a reagent
blank.

3. Filtration or centrifugation before reading
absorbance is required if the reaction mixture
is not clear.

4. A standard curve of concentration versus
absorbance is constructed using bovine serum
albumin (BSA).

9.2.4.3 Applications
The biuret method has been used to determine pro-
teins in cereal (15, 16), meat (17), soybean proteins
(18), and as a qualitative test for animal feed [AOAC
Method 935.11 (refers to Methods 22.012–22.013,

140

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

9.2.5.2 Procedure
The following procedure is based on the modiﬁed
procedure of Hartree (23):

1. Proteins to be analyzed are diluted to an appro-

priate range (20–100 μ g).

2. K Na Tartrate-Na2CO3 solution is added after
cooling and incubated at room temperature for
10 min.

3. CuSO4-K Na Tartrate-NaOH solution is added
after cooling and incubated at room tempera-
ture for 10 min.

4. Freshly prepared Folin reagent is added and
then the reaction mixture is mixed and incu-
bated at 50

C for 10 min.

◦

5. Absorbance is read at 650 nm.
6. A standard curve of BSA is carefully con-
structed for estimating protein concentration of
the unknown.

9.2.5.3 Applications
Because of its simplicity and sensitivity, the Lowry
method has been widely used in protein biochemistry.
However, it has not been widely used to determine
proteins in food systems without ﬁrst extracting the
proteins from the food mixture.

Advantages:

1. Very sensitive

method

(a) 50–100 times more sensitive than biuret

(b) 10–20 times more sensitive than 280-nm UV

absorption method (described below)

(c) Similar sensitivity as Nesslerization; how-

ever, more convenient than Nesslerization

2. Less affected by turbidity of the sample.
3. More speciﬁc than most other methods.
4. Relatively simple; can be done in 1–1.5 h.

Disadvantages:

For the following reasons, the Lowry procedure
requires careful standardization for particular applica-
tions:

1. Color varies with different proteins to a greater

extent than the biuret method.

2. Color is not strictly proportional to protein con-

centration.

3. The reaction is interfered with to varying
degrees by sucrose, lipids, phosphate buffers,
monosaccharides, and hexoamines.

4. High concentrations of reducing sugars, ammo-
nium sulfate, and sulfhydryl compounds inter-
fere with the reaction.

9.2.6 Dye-Binding Methods
9.2.6.1 AnionicDye-BindingMethod
9.2.6.1.1 Principle The protein-containing sample is
mixed with a known excess amount of anionic dye
in a buffered solution. Proteins bind the dye to form
an insoluble complex. The unbound soluble dye is
measured after equilibration of the reaction and the
removal of insoluble complex by centrifugation or
ﬁltration.

Protein + excess dye → Protein
−dye insoluble complex + unbound soluble dye
[10]

The anionic sulfonic acid dye,

including acid
orange 12, orange G, and Amido Black 10B, binds
cationic groups of the basic amino acid residues
(imidazole of histidine, guanidine of arginine, and
-amino group of lysine) and the free amino terminal
group of the protein (24). The amount of the unbound
dye is inversely related to the protein content of the
sample (24).

9.2.6.1.2 Procedure

1. The sample is ﬁnely ground (60 mesh or smaller
sizes) and added to an excess dye solution with
known concentration.

2. The content is vigorously shaken to equilibrate
the dye binding reactions and ﬁltered or cen-
trifuged to remove insoluble substances.

3. Absorbance of the unbound dye solution in
the ﬁltrate or supernatant is measured and dye
concentration is estimated from a dye stan-
dard curve.

4. A straight calibration curve can be obtained
by plotting the unbound dye concentration
against total nitrogen (as determined by Kjeld-
hal method) of a given food covering a wide
range of protein content.

5. Protein content of the unknown sample of the
same food type can be estimated from the cal-
ibration curve or from a regression equation
calculated by the least squares method.

9.2.6.1.3 Applications Anionic dye binding has been
used to estimate proteins in milk (25, 26), wheat ﬂour
(27), soy products (18), and meats (17). The AOAC
approved methods include two dye-binding methods
[Method 967.12 using Acid Orange 12 and Method
975.17 using Amido Black (10B) for analyzing proteins
in milk]. AACC Method 46–14.02 uses Acid Orange
12 binding for measuring proteins in wheat ﬂour and
soy samples (28). An automated Sprint Rapid Protein

Chapter 9 • Protein Analysis

141

Analyzer has been developed by the CEM Company
(Matthews, NC) based on the anionic dye-binding
method. This automated method requires calibration
for each type of food protein determined using other
ofﬁcial methods.
Advantages:

1. Rapid (15 min or less), inexpensive, and rela-
tively accurate for analyzing protein content in
food commodities.

2. May be used to estimate the changes in avail-
able lysine content of cereal products during
processing since the dye does not bind altered,
unavailable lysine. Since lysine is the limit-
ing amino acid in cereal products, the avail-
able lysine content represents protein nutritive
value of the cereal products (29).

3. No corrosive reagents.
4. Does not measure nonprotein nitrogen.
5. More precise than the Kjeldahl method.

Disadvantages:

1. Not sensitive; milligram quantities of protein

are required.

2. Proteins differ in basic amino acid content and
so differ in dye-binding capacity. Therefore, a
calibration curve for a given food commodity is
required.

3. Not suitable for hydrolyzed proteins due to

binding to N-terminal amino acids.

4. Some nonprotein components bind dye (i.e.,
starch) or protein (calcium or phosphate) and
cause errors in ﬁnal results. The problem with
calcium and heavy metal ions can be eliminated
using properly buffered reagent that contains
oxalic acid.

9.2.6.2.2 Procedure

1. Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 is dissolved in
95% ethanol and acidiﬁed with 85% phospho-
ric acid.

2. Samples containing proteins (1–100 μ g/ml)
and standard BSA solutions are mixed with the
Bradford reagent.

3. Absorbance at 595 nm is read against a reagent

blank.

4. Protein concentration in the sample is esti-

mated from the BSA standard curve.

9.2.6.2.3 Applications The Bradford method has
been used successfully to determine protein content
in worts and beer products (31) and in potato tubers
(32). This procedure has been improved to measure
microgram quantities of proteins (33). Due to its rapid-
ity, sensitivity, and fewer interferences than the Lowry
method, the Bradford method has been used widely
for the analysis of low concentrations of proteins and
enzymes in their puriﬁcation and characterizations.

Advantages:

1. Rapid; reaction can be completed in 2 min
2. Reproducible
3. Sensitive; several fold more sensitive than the

Lowry method

4. No interference from ammonium sulfate,
polyphenols, carbohydrates such as sucrose,
or cations such as K+, Na+, and Mg+2

5. Measures protein or peptides with molecular
mass approximately equal to or greater than
4000 Da
Disadvantages:

9.2.6.2 BradfordDye-BindingMethod
9.2.6.2.1 Principle When Coomassie Brilliant Blue
G-250 binds to protein, the dye changes color from
reddish to bluish, and the absorption maximum of
the dye is shifted from 465 to 595 nm. The change
in the absorbance at 595 nm is proportional to the
protein concentration of the sample (30). Like other
dye-binding methods,
the Bradford relies on the
amphoteric nature of proteins. When the protein-
containing solution is acidiﬁed to a pH less than
the isoelectric point of the protein(s) of interest, the
dye added binds electrostatically. Binding efﬁciency
is enhanced by hydrophobic interaction of the dye
molecule with the polypeptide backbone adjoining
positively charged residues in the protein (4). In the
case of the Bradford method, the dye bound to pro-
tein has a change in absorbance spectrum relative to
the unbound dye.

1. Interfered with by both nonionic and ionic
detergents, such as Triton X-100 and sodium
dodecyl sulfate. However, errors due to small
amounts (0.1%) of these detergents can be cor-
rected using proper controls.

2. The protein–dye complex can bind to quartz
cuvettes. The analyst must use glass or plastic
cuvettes.

3. Color varies with different types of proteins.
The standard protein must be selected carefully.

9.2.7 Bicinchoninic Acid Method
9.2.7.1 Principle
Proteins and peptides (as short as dipeptides) reduce
cupric ions to cuprous ions under alkaline condi-
tions (34), which is similar in principle to that of the
biuret reaction. The cuprous ion then reacts with the
apple-greenish bicinchoninic acid (BCA) reagent to

142

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

OOC

OOC

N

N

N

COO

Cu+1

N

COO

9-4
f i g u r e

Protein reaction with cupric ions under alka-
line conditions to form cuprous ions, which
react with bicinchoninic acid (BCA) to form
purple color, measured at 562 nm.
(Figure
Courtesy of Pierce Biotechnology Technical
Library, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Inc., Rock-
ford, IL.)

form a purplish complex (one cuprous ion is chelated
by two BCA molecules) (Fig. 9-4). The color mea-
sured at 562 nm is near linearly proportional to pro-
tein concentration over a wide range of concentration
from micrograms up to 2 mg/ml. Peptide bonds and
four amino acids (cysteine, cystine, tryptophan, and
tyrosine) contribute to the color formation with BCA.

9.2.7.2 Procedure

◦

1. Mix (one step) the protein solution with the
BCA reagent, which contains BCA sodium salt,
sodium carbonate, NaOH, and copper sulfate,
pH 11.25.

◦

2. Incubate at 37

C for 30 min, or room tempera-
ture for 2 h, or 60
C for 30 min. The selection
of the temperature depends upon sensitivity
desired. A higher temperature gives a greater
color response.

3. Read the solution at 562 nm against a reagent

blank.

4. Construct a standard curve using BSA.

9.2.7.3 Applications
The BCA method has been used in protein isolation
and puriﬁcation. The suitability of this procedure for
measuring protein in complex food systems has not
been reported.

Advantages:
1. Sensitivity is comparable to that of the Lowry
method; sensitivity of the micro-BCA method
(0.5–10 μ g) is better than that of the Lowry
method.

2. One-step mixing is easier than in the Lowry

3. The reagent is more stable than for the Lowry

method.

reagent.

4. Nonionic detergent and buffer salts do not

interfere with the reaction.

5. Medium concentrations of denaturing reag-
ents (4 M guanidine-HCl or 3 M urea) do not
interfere.
Disadvantages:

1. Color is not stable with time. The analyst
needs to carefully control the time for reading
absorbance.

2. Any compound capable of reducing Cu+2 to

Cu+ will lead to color formation.

3. Reducing sugars interfere to a greater extent
than in the Lowry method. High concentrations
of ammonium sulfate also interfere.

4. Color variations among proteins are similar to

those in the Lowry method.

9.2.8 Ultraviolet 280 nm Absorption Method
9.2.8.1 Principle
Proteins show strong absorption in the region at ultra-
violet (UV) 280 nm, primarily due to tryptophan and
tyrosine residues in the proteins. Because the con-
tent of tryptophan and tyrosine in proteins from each
food source is fairly constant, the absorbance at 280 nm
could be used to estimate the concentration of pro-
teins, using Beer’s law. Since each protein has a unique
aromatic amino acid composition, the extinction coef-
ﬁcient (E280) or molar absorptivity (Em) must be
determined for individual proteins for protein content
estimation.

9.2.8.2 Procedure

1. Proteins are solubilized in buffer or alkali.
2. Absorbance of protein solution is read at

280 nm against a reagent blank.

3. Protein concentration is calculated according to

the equation

A = abc

[11]

where:

A = absorbance
a = absorptivity
b = cell or cuvette path length
c = concentration

9.2.8.3 Applications
The UV 280-nm method has been used to determine
the protein contents of milk (35) and meat products
(36). It has not been used widely in food systems. This
technique is better applied in a puriﬁed protein sys-
tem or to proteins that have been extracted in alkali or
denaturing agents such as 8 M urea. Although peptide

Chapter 9 • Protein Analysis

143

bonds in proteins absorb more strongly at 190–220 nm
than at 280 nm, the low UV region is more difﬁcult to
measure.
Advantages:

1. Rapid and relatively sensitive; At 280 nm,
100 μ g or more protein is required; several times
more sensitive than the biuret method.

2. No interference from ammonium sulfate and

other buffer salts.

3. Nondestructive; samples can be used for other
analyses after protein determination; used very
widely in postcolumn detection of proteins.

Disadvantages:

1. Nucleic acids also absorb at 280 nm. The
absorption 280 nm/260 nm ratios for pure pro-
tein and nucleic acids are 1.75 and 0.5, respec-
tively. One can correct the absorption of nucleic
acids at 280 nm if the ratio of the absorp-
tion of 280 nm/260 nm is known. Nucleic acids
also can be corrected using a method based
on the absorption difference between 235 and
280 nm (37).

2. Aromatic amino acid contents in the proteins
from various food sources differ considerably.
3. The solution must be clear and colorless. Tur-
bidity due to particulates in the solution will
increase absorbance falsely.

4. A relatively pure system is required to use this

method.

9.3 COMPARISON OF METHODS

• Sample preparation: The Kjeldahl, Dumas,
and infrared spectroscopy methods require lit-
tle preparation. Sample particle size of 20 mesh
or smaller generally is satisfactory for these
methods. Some of the newer NIR instruments
can make measurements directly on whole
grains and other coarsely granulated products
without grinding or other sample preparation.
Other methods described in this chapter require
ﬁne particles for extraction of proteins from the
complex food systems.
• Principle: The Dumas and Kjeldahl meth-
ods measure directly the nitrogen content of
foods. However,
the Kjeldahl method mea-
sures only organic nitrogen plus ammonia,
while Dumas measures total nitrogen, includ-
ing the inorganic fraction. (Therefore, Dumas
gives a higher value for products that contain
nitrates/nitrites.) Other methods of analysis
measure the various properties of proteins. For
instance, the biuret method measures peptide

bonds, and the Lowry method measures a com-
bination of peptide bonds and the amino acids
tryptophan and tyrosine. Infrared spectroscopy
is an indirect method to estimate protein con-
tent, based on the energy absorbed when a
sample is subjected to a wavelength of infrared
radiation speciﬁc for the peptide bond.
• Sensitivity: Kjeldahl, Dumas, and biuret meth-
ods are less sensitive than Lowry, Bradford,
BCA, or UV methods.
• Speed: After the instrument has been prop-
erly calibrated, infrared spectroscopy is likely
the most rapid of the methods discussed. In
most other methods involving spectrophoto-
metric (colorimetric) measurements, one must
separate proteins from the interfering insoluble
materials before mixing with the color reagents
or must remove the insoluble materials from
the colored protein–reagent complex after mix-
ing. However, the speed of determination in
the colorimetric methods and in the Dumas
method is faster than with the Kjeldahl method.
• Applications: Although both Kjeldahl and
Dumas methods can be used to measure N
content in all types of foods, in recent years
the Dumas method has largely replaced the
Kjeldahl method for nutrition labeling (since
Dumas method is faster, has a lower detec-
tion limit, and is safer). However, the Kjeldahl
method is the preferred method for high-
fat samples/products since fat may cause an
instrument ﬁre during the incineration proce-
dure in the Dumas method. Also,
the Kjel-
dahl method is speciﬁed to correct for pro-
tein content in an ofﬁcial method to mea-
sure the ﬁber content of foods (see Chap. 10,
Sect. 10.5). Melamine, a toxic nitrogen adulter-
ant, is included in the total nitrogen content if
measured by the Kjeldahl or Dumas methods.

9.4 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS

1. To select a particular method for a speciﬁc
application, sensitivity, accuracy, and repro-
ducibility as well as physicochemical properties
of food materials must be considered. The data
should be interpreted carefully to reﬂect what
actually is being measured.

2. Food processing methods, such as heating, may
reduce the extractability of proteins for analy-
sis and cause an underestimation of the pro-
tein content measured by methods involving an
extraction step (9).

3. Except for the Dumas and Kjeldahl methods,
and the UV method for puriﬁed proteins, all

144

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

4. Nonprotein nitrogen is present

methods require the use of a standard or refer-
ence protein or a calibration with the Kjeldahl
method. In the methods using a standard pro-
tein, proteins in the samples are assumed to
have similar composition and behavior com-
pared with the standard protein. The selection
of an appropriate standard for a speciﬁc type of
food is important.

in practi-
cally all foods. To determine protein nitro-
gen, the samples usually are extracted under
alkaline conditions
then precipitated with
trichloroacetic acid or sulfosalicylic acid. The
concentration of the acid used affects the pre-
cipitation yield. Therefore, nonprotein nitrogen
content may vary with the type and concentra-
tion of the reagent used. Heating could be used
to aid protein precipitation by acid, alcohol, or
other organic solvents. In addition to acid pre-
cipitation methods used for nonprotein nitro-
gen determination, less empirical methods such
as dialysis and ultraﬁltration and column chro-
matography could be used to separate proteins
from small nonprotein substances.

5. In the determination of the nutritive value of
food proteins, including protein digestibility
and protein efﬁciency ratio (PER), the Kjeldahl
method with a 6.25 conversion factor usually is
used to determine crude protein content. The
PER could be underestimated if a substantial
amount of nonprotein nitrogen is present in
foods. A food sample with a higher nonprotein
nitrogen content (particularly if the nonprotein
nitrogen does not have many amino acids or
small peptides) may have a lower PER than a
food sample containing similar protein struc-
ture/composition and yet with a lower amount
of nonprotein nitrogen.

9.5 SUMMARY

Methods based on the unique characteristics of pro-
teins and amino acids have been described to deter-
mine the protein content of foods. The Kjeldahl and
Dumas methods measure nitrogen.
Infrared spec-
troscopy is based on absorption of a wavelength
of infrared radiation speciﬁc for the peptide bond.
Copper–peptide bond interactions contribute to the
analysis by the biuret and Lowry methods. Amino
acids are involved in the Lowry, dye-binding, and UV
280 nm methods. The BCA method utilizes the reduc-
ing power of proteins in an alkaline solution. The
various methods differ in their speed and sensitivity.

In addition to the commonly used methods dis-
cussed, there are other methods available for protein

quantiﬁcation. Because of the complex nature of var-
ious food systems, problems may be encountered to
different degrees in protein analysis by available meth-
ods. Rapid methods may be suitable for quality con-
trol purposes, while a sensitive method is required
for work with a minute amount of protein. Indirect
colorimetric methods usually require the use of a care-
fully selected protein standard or a calibration with an
ofﬁcial method (e.g., Kjeldahl).

9.6 STUDY QUESTIONS

1. What factors should one consider when choosing a

method for protein determination?

2. The Kjeldahl method of protein analysis consists of three
major steps. List these steps in the order they are done
and describe in words what occurs in each step. Make
it clear why milliliters of HCl can be used as an indirect
measure of the protein content of a sample.

3. Why is the conversion factor from Kjeldahl nitrogen to
protein different for various foods, and how is the factor
of 6.25 obtained?

4. How can Nesslerization or the procedure that uses phe-
nol and hypochlorite be used as part of the Kjeldahl
procedure, and why might they be best for the analysis?
5. Differentiate and explain the chemical basis of the follow-
ing techniques that can be used to quantitate proteins in
quality control/research:
(a) Kjeldahl method
(b) Dumas method (N combustion)
(c) Infrared spectroscopy
(d) Biuret method
(e) Lowry method
(f) Bradford method
(g) Bicinchoninic acid method
(h) Absorbance at 280 nm
(i) Absorbance at 220 nm

6. Differentiate the principles of protein determination by
dye binding with an anionic dye such as Amido Black vs.
with the Bradford method, which uses the dye Coomassie
Blue G-250.

7. With the anionic dye-binding method, would a sample
with a higher protein content have a higher or a lower
absorbance reading than a sample with a low protein
content? Explain your answer.

8. For each of the situations described below, identify a pro-
tein assay method most appropriate for use, and indicate
the chemical basis of the method (i.e., what does it really
measure?)
(a) Nutrition labeling
(b) Intact protein eluting from a chromatography column;

qualitative or semiquantitative method

(c) Intact protein eluting from a chromatography column;

colorimetric, quantitative method

(d) Rapid, quality control method for protein content of

cereal grains

9. The FDA found melamine (see structure below) in pet
food linked to deaths of pets in the United States. The

Chapter 9 • Protein Analysis

145

FDA also found evidence of melamine in wheat gluten
imported from China used as one of the ingredients in
the production of the pet food. Melamine is a nitrogen-
rich chemical used to make plastic and sometimes used
as a fertilizer.

Calculations:
% N = N HCl × Corrected acid volume

g of sample

× 14 g N
mol

× 100

[6]

NH2

N

N

H2N

N

NH2

where:
NHCl = normality of HCl, in mol/1000 ml
Corrected acid vol. = (ml std. acid for sample)
– (ml std. acid for blank)

14 = atomic weight of nitrogen

Corrected acid volume for Sample 1
= 22.0 ml − 0.2 ml = 21.8 ml
Corrected acid volume for Sample 2
= 22.5 ml − 0.2 ml = 22.3 ml
%N for Sample 1
= 0.1142 mol
1000 ml

× 21.8 ml
1.015 g

× 14 g N
mol

× 100% = 3.433%

%N for Sample 2
= 0.1142 mol
1000 ml

× 22.3 ml
1.025 g

× 14 g N
mol

× 100% = 3.478%

Protein conversion factor = 100%/17.5% N = 5.71
Crude protein content for Sample 1
= 3.433% × 5.71 = 19.6%
Crude protein content for Sample 2
= 3.478% × 5.71 = 19.9%
The average for the duplicate data = (19.6% +
19.9%)/2 = 19.75% = ∼19.8% wet weight basis.
To calculate protein content on a dry weight basis: Sam-
ple contain 8% moisture, therefore, the sample contains
92% dry solids, or 0.92 g out of 1-g sample. Therefore,
protein on a dry weight basis can be calculated as fol-
lows = 19.75%/0.92 g dry solids = 21.47% = ∼21.5% dry
weight basis.

2. Protein content = 0.68 mg/ml. Total protein quantity =

6.96 mg
Calculations:
Plot absorbance (y-axis, absorbance at 562 nm) vs. BSA
protein concentration (x-axis, mg/ml)) using the data
above. Determine the equation of the line (y = 1.11x +
0.058), then use this equation and the given absorbance
(y = 0.44) to calculate the concentration (x =
0.344 mg/ml). Since 1 ml of sample gives a concentration
of 0.344 mg/ml and we have a total of 20 ml collected
from column chromatography, we will have a total of
(0.344 mg/ml× 20 ml) = 6.88 mg protein in this collected
column fraction.

(a) Knowing that each ingredient is tested and analyzed
when imported, explain how melamine in wheat
gluten could have escaped detection.

(b) How can the adulteration of wheat gluten be detected
(not necessarily detecting melamine speciﬁcally),
using a combination of protein analysis methods?
Explain your answer.

9.7 PRACTICE PROBLEMS

1. A dehydrated precooked pinto bean was analyzed for
crude protein content in duplicate using the Kjeldahl
method. The following data were recorded:
– Moisture content = 8.00%
– Wt of Sample 1 = 1.015 g
– Wt of Sample 2 = 1.025 g
– Normality of HCl used for titration = 0.1142 N
– HCl used for Sample 1 = 22.0 ml
– HCl used for Sample 2 = 22.5 ml
– HCl used for reagent blank = 0.2 ml

Calculate crude protein content on both wet and
dry weight basis of the pinto bean, assuming pinto
bean protein contains 17.5% nitrogen.

2. A 20 ml protein fraction recovered from a column chro-
matography was analyzed for protein using the BCA
method. The following data were the means of a dupli-
cate analysis using BSA as a standard:

BSA
(mg/ml)

MeanAbsorbance

at562nm

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0

0.25
0.53
0.74
0.95
1.15

The average absorbance of a 1-ml sample was
0.44. Calculate protein concentration (mg/ml) and
total protein quantity of this column fraction.

Answers
1. Protein content = 19.75% on a wet weight basis; 21.47%

on a dry weight basis.

146

9.8 REFERENCES

1. Jones DB (1931) Factors for converting percentages of
nitrogen in foods and feeds into percentages of pro-
teins. US Dept. Agric. Circular No. 183, August. USDA,
Washington, DC

2. US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research
Service (2008) USDA National Nutrient Database for
Standard References, Release 21. Nutrient Data Labora-
tory Home Page. http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/
ndl

3. AOAC International (2007) Ofﬁcial Methods of Analy-
sis, 18th edn, 2005; Current through revision 2, 2007
(On-line). AOAC International, Gaithersburg, MD

4. Yada RY, Jackman RL, Smith JL, Marangoni AG (1996)
Analysis: quantitation and physical characterization
(Chapter 7). In: Nakai S, Modler HW (eds) Food pro-
teins. Properties and characterization. VCH, New York,
pp 333–403

5. Kolakowski E (2001) Protein determination and analysis
in food system (Chapter 4). In: Sikorski ZE (ed) Chemi-
cal and functional properties of food protein. Technomic
Publishing, Lancaster, PA, pp 57–112

6. Owusu-Apenten RK (2002) Food protein analysis. Quan-
titative effects on processing. Marcel Dekker, New York
7. Bradstreet RB (1965) The Kjeldahl method for organic

nitrogen. Academic, New York

8. Mossé J (1990) Nitrogen to protein conversion factor for
ten cereals and six legumes or oilseeds. A reappraisal of
its deﬁnition and determination. Variation according to
species and to seed protein content. J Agric Food Chem
38:18–24

9. Wilson PR (1990) A new instument concept for nitro-
gen/protein analysis. A challenge to the Kjeldahl
method. Aspects Appl Biol 25:443–446

10. Wiles PG, Gray I, Kissling RC (1998) Routine analysis of
proteins by Kjeldahl and Dumas methods: review and
interlaboratory study using dairy products. J AOAC Int
81:620–632

11. O’Sullivan A, O’Connor B, Kelly A, McGrath MJ (1999)
The use of chemical and infrared methods for analysis of
milk and dairy products. Int J Dairy Technol 52:139–148
12. Luinge HJ, Hop E, Lutz ETG, van Hemert JA, de Jong
EAM (1993) Determination of the fat, protein and lac-
tose content of milk using Fourier transform infrared
spectrometry. Anal Chim Acta 284:419–433

13. Krishnan PG, Park WJ, Kephart KD, Reeves DL, Yarrow
GL (1994) Measurement of protein and oil content of oat
cultivars using near-infrared reﬂectance. Cereal Foods
World 39(2):105–108

14. Robinson HW, Hodgen CG (1940) The biuret reaction
in the determination of serum protein. 1. A study of
the conditions necessary for the production of the sta-
ble color which bears a quantitative relationship to the
protein concentration. J Biol Chem 135:707–725

15. Jennings AC (1961) Determination of the nitrogen con-
tent of cereal grain by colorimetric methods. Cereal
Chem 38:467–479

16. Pinckney AJ (1961) The biuret test as applied to the

estimation of wheat protein. Cereal Chem 38:501–506

17. Torten J, Whitaker JR (1964) Evaluation of the biuret
and dye-binding methods for protein determination in
meats. J Food Sci 29:168–174

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

18. Pomeranz Y (1965) Evaluation of factors affecting the
determination of nitrogen in soya products by the
biuret and orange-G dye-binding methods. J Food Sci
30:307–311

19. AOAC (1965) Ofﬁcial methods of analysis,

10th
edn. Association of Ofﬁcial Analytical Chemists,
Washington, DC

20. Lowry OH, Rosebrough NJ, Farr AL, Randall RJ (1951)
Protein measurement with the Folin phenol reagent.
J Biol Chem 193:265–275

21. Peterson GL (1979) Review of the Folin phenol protein
quantitation method of Lowry, Rosebrough, Farr, and
Randall. Anal Biochem 100:201–220

22. Miller GL (1959) Protein determination for large num-

bers of samples. Anal Chem 31:964

23. Hartree EF (1972) Determination of protein: a modiﬁca-
tion of the Lowry method that gives a linear photometric
response. Anal Biochem 48:422–427

24. Fraenkel-Conrat H, Cooper M (1944) The use of dye for
the determination of acid and basic groups in proteins.
J Biol Chem 154:239–246

25. Udy DC (1956) A rapid method for estimating total

protein in milk. Nature 178:314–315

26. Tarassuk NP, Abe N, Moats WA (1966) The dye bind-
ing of milk proteins. Technical bulletin no. 1369. USDA
Agricultural Research Service in cooperation with
California Agricultural Experiment Station. Washington,
DC

27. Udy DC (1954) Dye-binding capacities of wheat ﬂour

protein fractions. Cereal Chem 31:389–395

28. AACC International (2010) Approved methods of Amer-
ican association of cereal chemists international, 11th
edn (On-line). American Association of Cereal Chemists,
St. Paul, MN

29. Hurrel RF, Lerman P, Carpenter KJ (1979) Reactive lysine
in foodstuffs as measured by a rapid dye-binding proce-
dure. J Food Sci 44:1221–1227

30. Bradford M (1976) A rapid and sensitive method for the
quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utiliz-
ing the principle of protein–dye binding. Anal Biochem
72:248–254

31. Lewis MJ, Krumland SC, Muhleman DJ (1980) Dye-
binding method for measurement of protein in wort and
beer. J Am Soc Brew Chem 38:37–41

32. Snyder J, Desborou S (1978) Rapid estimation of potato
tuber total protein content with Coomassie Brilliant Blue
G-250. Theor Appl Genet 52:135–139

33. Bearden JC Jr (1978) Quantitation of submicrogram
quantities of protein by an improved protein–dye bind-
ing assay. Biochim Biophys Acta 533:525–529

34. Smith PK, Krohn RL, Hermanson GT, Mallia AK,
Gartner FH, Provensano MD, Fujimoto EK, Goeke NM,
Olson BJ, Klenk DC (1985) Measurement of protein using
bicinchoninic acid. Anal Biochem 150:76–85

35. Nakai S, Wilson HK, Herreid EO (1964) Spectropho-
tometric determination of protein in milk. J Dairy Sci
47:356–358

36. Gabor E (1979) Determination of the protein content of
certain meat products by ultraviolet absorption spec-
trophotometry. Acta Alimentaria 8(2):157–167

37. Whitaker JR, Granum PE (1980) An absolute method for
protein determination based on difference in absorbance
at 235 and 280 nm. Anal Biochem 109:156–159

10

c h a p t e r

Carbohydrate Analysis

JamesN.BeMiller
DepartmentofFoodScience,PurdueUniversity,
WestLafayette,IN47907–2009,USA
bemiller@purdue.edu

10.1 Introduction 149
10.2 Sample Preparation 151
10.3 Mono- and Oligosaccharides 152

10.3.1 Extraction 152
10.3.2 Total Carbohydrate: Phenol-Sulfuric Acid

Method 152
10.3.2.1 Principle and

Characteristics 152

10.3.2.2 Outline of Procedure 153

10.3.3 Total Reducing Sugar 153

10.3.3.1 Somogyi–Nelson Method 153

10.3.3.1.1 Principle 153

10.3.3.1.2 Outline of

Procedure 154

10.3.3.2 Other Methods (3) 154

10.3.4 Speciﬁc Analysis

of Mono- and Oligosaccharides 155
10.3.4.1 High-performance Liquid

Chromatography 155
10.3.4.1.1 Stationary

Phases 155

10.3.4.1.2 Detectors 156
10.3.4.2 Gas Chromatography 157

S.S. Nielsen, Food Analysis, Food Science Texts Series, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1478-1_10,
c(cid:2) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

147

148

10.3.4.2.1 Neutral Sugars:

Outline of Procedure
(38) 157

10.3.4.2.2 Hydrolyzates of
Polysaccharides
Containing Uronic
Acids: Outline of
Procedure (41) 158

10.3.4.3 Enzymic Methods 159

10.3.4.3.1 Overview 159
10.3.4.3.2 Sample

Preparation 159

10.3.4.3.3 Enzymic

Determination of
D-Glucose 159

10.3.4.4 Mass Spectrometry 159
10.3.4.5 Thin-layer

Chromatography 160

10.3.4.6 Capillary Electrophoresis

(46, 47) 160

10.4 Polysaccharides 160

10.4.1 Starch 160

10.4.1.1 Total Starch 160

10.4.1.1.1 Principle 160
10.4.1.1.2 Potential

Problems 160

10.4.1.1.3 Outline of

Procedure 161
10.4.1.2 Degree of Gelatinization of

Starch 162

10.4.1.3 Degree of Retrogradation of

10.4.2 Nonstarch Polysaccharides

Starch 162

(Hydrocolloids/Food Gums) 162
10.4.2.1 Overview 162
10.4.2.2 Hydrocolloid/Food Gum

Content Determination 163

10.4.2.3 Pectin 165

10.4.2.3.1 Nature of

Pectin 165

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

10.4.2.3.2 Pectin Content

Determination 165

10.4.2.3.3 Degree of

Esteriﬁcation 165

10.5 Dietary Fiber 165

10.5.1 Introduction 165

10.5.1.1 Importance of Dietary

Fiber 166

10.5.1.2 Deﬁnition 166

10.5.2 Major Components of Dietary Fiber 167

10.5.2.1 Cell-Wall Polysaccharides of

Land Plants 167
10.5.2.1.1 Cellulose 167
10.5.2.1.2 Hemicelluloses 167
10.5.2.1.3 Pectins 167

10.5.2.2 Hydrocolloids/Food Gums as

Dietary Fiber 167

10.5.2.3 Resistant Starch 167
10.5.2.4 Lignin 168

10.5.3 General Considerations 168
10.5.4 Methods 168

10.5.4.1 Overview 168
10.5.4.2 Sample Preparation 168
10.5.4.3 Methods 169

10.5.4.3.1 Overview 169
10.5.4.3.2 AOAC Method
991.43 (AACC
Method
32-07.01) 169

10.6 Physical Methods 171
10.6.1 Microscopy 171
10.6.2 Mass and NIR Transmittance

Spectrometry 171

10.6.3 Speciﬁc Gravity 172
10.6.4 Refractive Index 172

10.7 Summary 172
10.8 Study Questions 173
10.9 Practice Problems 173
10.10 References 175

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

10.1 INTRODUCTION

Carbohydrates are important in foods as a major
source of energy, to impart crucial textural properties,
and as dietary ﬁber which inﬂuences physiological
processes. Digestible carbohydrates, which are con-
verted into monosaccharides, which are absorbed,
provide metabolic energy. Worldwide, carbohydrates
account for more than 70% of the caloric value of the
human diet. It is recommended that all persons should
limit calories from fat (the other signiﬁcant source) to
not more than 30% and that most of the carbohy-
drate calories should come from starch. Nondigestible
polysaccharides (all those other than starch) com-
prise the major portion of dietary ﬁber (Sect. 10.5).
Carbohydrates also contribute other attributes, includ-
ing bulk, body, viscosity, stability to emulsions and
foams, water-holding capacity, freeze-thaw stability,
browning, ﬂavors, aromas, and a range of desirable
textures (from crispness to smooth, soft gels). They
also provide satiety. Basic carbohydrate structures,
chemistry, and terminology can be found in references
(1, 2).

Major occurrences of major carbohydrates in foods
are presented in Table 10-1. Ingested carbohydrates are
almost exclusively of plant origin, with milk lactose
being the major exception. Of the monosaccharides
(sometimes called simple sugars), only D-glucose and
D-fructose are found in other than minor amounts.
Monosaccharides are the only carbohydrates that can
be absorbed from the small intestine. Higher sac-
charides (oligo- and polysaccharides) must ﬁrst be
digested (i.e., hydrolyzed to monosaccharides) before
absorption and utilization can occur.
(Note: There
is no ofﬁcial deﬁnition of an oligosaccharide. Most
sources consider an oligosaccharide to be a carbo-
hydrate composed of from 2 to 10 sugar (saccha-
ride) units. A polysaccharide usually contains from
30 to at least 60,000 monosaccharide units.) Humans
can digest only sucrose,
lactose, maltooligosaccha-
rides/maltodextrins, and starch. All are digested with
enzymes found in the small intestine.

At least 90% of the carbohydrate in nature is in
the form of polysaccharides. As stated above, starch
polymers are the only polysaccharides that humans
can digest and use as a source of calories and carbon.
All other polysaccharides are nondigestible. Nondi-
gestible polysaccharides can be divided into soluble
and insoluble classes. Along with lignin and other
nondigestible, nonabsorbed substances,
they make
up dietary ﬁber (Sect. 10.5). As dietary ﬁber, they
regulate normal bowel function, reduce the postpran-
dial hyperglycemic response, and may lower serum
cholesterol, among other effects. However, nondi-
gestible polysaccharides most often are added to pro-
cessed foods because of the functional properties they

149

impart, rather than for a physiological effect. Nondi-
gestible oligosaccharides serve as prebiotics and are,
therefore,
increasingly used as ingredients in func-
tional foods and neutraceuticals. The foods in which
dietary ﬁber components can be used, and particu-
larly the amounts that can be incorporated, are limited
because addition above a certain level usually changes
the characteristics of the food product. Indeed, as
already stated,
they are used often as ingredients
because of their ability to impart important functional
properties at a low level of usage.

Carbohydrate analysis is important from several
perspectives. Qualitative and quantitative analysis is
used to determine compositions of foods, beverages,
and their ingredients. Qualitative analysis ensures
that ingredient labels present accurate compositional
information. Quantitative analysis ensures that added
components are listed in the proper order on ingre-
dient labels. Quantitative analysis also ensures that
amounts of speciﬁc components of consumer inter-
for example, β-glucan, are proper and that
est,
caloric content can be calculated. Both qualitative
and quantitative analysis can be used to authenticate
(i.e., to detect adulteration of) food ingredients and
products.

In this chapter, the most commonly used meth-
ods of carbohydrate determination are presented. [A
thorough description of the analytical chemistry of
carbohydrates was published in 1998 (3).] However,
methods often must be made speciﬁc to a particular
food product because of the nature of the product and
the presence of other constituents. Approved methods
are referenced, but method approval has not kept pace
with methods development; so where better meth-
ods are available, they are also presented. Methods
that have been in long-time use, although not giving
as much or as precise information as newer methods,
nevertheless may be useful for quality assurance and
product standardization in some cases.

In general, evolution of analytical methods for
carbohydrates has followed the succession: quali-
tative color tests, adaptation of the color test for
reducing sugars based on reduction of Cu(II)
to
Cu(I) (Fehling test) to quantitation of reducing sug-
ars, qualitative paper chromatography, quantitative
paper chromatography, gas chromatography (GC) of
derivatized sugars, qualitative and quantitative thin-
layer chromatography, enzymic methods, and high-
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Multi-
ple ofﬁcial methods for the analysis of mono- and
disaccharides in foods are currently approved by
AOAC International (4, 5); some are outdated, but
still used. Methods continue to be developed and
reﬁned. Methods employing nuclear magnetic reso-
nance, near-infrared (NIR) spectrometry (Sect. 10.6.2
and Chap. 23), antibodies (Immunoassays; Chap. 17),

150

10-1
table

Occurrences of Some Major Carbohydrates in Foods

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

Carbohydrate

Monosaccharidesa

D-Glucose (Dextrose)

D-Fructose

Sugar alcohola

Sorbitol (D-Glucitol)

Disaccharidesa

Sucrose

Lactose

Maltose

Higher oligosaccharidesa

Maltooligosaccharides

Rafﬁnose

Stachyose

Polysaccharides

Starchb

Food gums/hydrocolloidsc

Algins
Carboxymethylcelluloses
Carrageenans
Curdlan
Gellan
Guar gum
Gum arabic
Hydroxypropylmethyl-celluloses
Inulin
Konjac glucomannan
Locust bean gum
Methylcelluloses
Pectins
Xanthan

Cell-wall polysaccharidesc

Pectin (native)
Cellulose
Hemicelluloses
Beta-glucan

Source

Constituent(s)

Naturally occurring in honey, fruits, and fruit

juices. Added as a component of corn
(glucose) syrups and high-fructose syrups.
Produced during processing by hydrolysis
(inversion) of sucrose.

Naturally occurring in honey, fruits, and fruit

juices. Added as a component of
high-fructose syrups. Produced during
processing by hydrolysis (inversion) of
sucrose.

Added to food products, primarily as a

humectant

Widely distributed in fruit and vegetable
tissues and juices in varying amounts.
Added to food and beverage products

In milk and products derived from milk

In malt. In varying amounts in various corn

(glucose) syrups and maltodextrins

Maltodextrins. In varying amounts in various

glucose (corn) syrups
Small amounts in beans

Small amounts in beans

Widespread in cereal grains and tubers.

Added to processed foods.

Added as ingredients

D-Fructose
D-Glucose

D-Galactose
D-Glucose
D-Glucose

D-Glucose

D-Glucose
D-Fructose
D-Galactose
D-Glucose
D-Fructose
D-Galactose

D-Glucose

d

Naturally occurring

aFor analysis, see Sect. 10.3.4.
bFor analysis, see Sect. 10.4.1.1.
cFor analysis, see Sect. 10.4.2.
dFor compositions, characteristics, and applications, see reference (2) and Table 10-2.

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

151

ﬂuorescence spectrometry (Chap. 22), capillary elec-
trophoresis (Sect. 10.3.4.6), and mass spectrometry
(Sect. 10.3.4.4) have been published, but are not yet in
general use for carbohydrate analysis.

It should be noted that, according to the nutrition
labeling regulations of the US Food and Drug Admin-
istration, the “total carbohydrate” content of a food
(Table 10-2), which is declared in relation to a serving,
which is deﬁned as the amount of food customarily
consumed per eating occasion by persons 4-years of
age or older [(6), paragraph (b)(1)], must be calcu-
lated by subtraction of the sums of the weights of

10-2
table

Food

Total Carbohydrate Contents of Selected
Foodsa

ApproximatePercent

Carbohydrate

(WetWeightBasis)

crude protein, total fat, moisture, and ash in a serv-
ing from the total weight of the food in a serving [(6),
paragraph (c)(6)] (i.e., carbohydrate is determined by
difference). The grams of dietary ﬁber (Sect. 10.5) in a
serving also must be stated on the label [(6), paragraph
(c)(6)(i)]. The content of “other carbohydrate” (for-
merly called “complex carbohydrate”) is obtained by
calculating the difference between the amount of “total
carbohydrate” and the sum of the amounts of dietary
ﬁber and sugars (Table 10-1). For labeling purposes,
sugars are deﬁned as the sum of all free monosaccha-
rides (viz., D-glucose and -fructose) and disaccharides
[viz., sucrose, lactose, and maltose (if a maltodextrin
or glucose/corn syrup has been added)] [(6), para-
graph (c)(6)(ii)] (Table 10-1). Other carbohydrates are
likely to be sugar alcohols (alditols, polyhydroxy alco-
hols, polyols), such as sorbitol and xylitol, the speciﬁc
declaring of which is also voluntary [(6), paragraph
(c)(6)(iii)].

Cereals, bread, and pasta

Corn ﬂakes
Macaroni, dry, enriched
Bread, white, commercially

prepared
Dairy products

Ice cream, chocolate
Yogurt, plain, low fat (12 g

protein/8 oz)

Milk, reduced fat, ﬂuid, 2%
Milk, chocolate, commercial, whole

Fruits and vegetables

Apple sauce, canned, sweetened,

with salt

Grapes, raw
Apples, raw, with skin
Potatoes, raw, with skin
Orange juice, raw
Carrots, raw
Broccoli, raw
Tomato, tomato juice, canned, with

Meat, poultry, and ﬁsh

Fish ﬁllets, battered or breaded,

Bologna, beef
Chicken, broilers or fryers, breast

salt

fried

meat

Other

Honey
Salad dressing, Italian, fat free
Salad dressing, Italian, regular
Carbonated beverage, cola,

contains caffeine

Cream of mushroom soup, from

condensed and canned

Light beer

80.4
74.7
50.6

28.2
7.0

4.7
10.3

19.9

17.2
13.8
12.4
10.4
9.6
6.6
4.2

17.0

4.0
0

82.4
11.0
10.4
9.6

6.7

1.6

aIn part from US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research
Service (2009). USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Ref-
erence. Release 22. Nutrient Data Laboratory Home Page, http://
www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl

10.2 SAMPLE PREPARATION

Sample preparation is related to the speciﬁc raw mate-
rial, ingredient, or food product being analyzed and
the speciﬁc carbohydrate being determined, because
carbohydrates have such a wide range of solubili-
ties. However, some generalities can be presented
(Fig. 10-1).

For most foods, the ﬁrst step is drying, which also
can be used to determine moisture content. For other
than beverages, drying is done by placing a weighed
amount of material in a vacuum oven and drying to
constant weight at 55
C and 1 mm Hg pressure. Then,
the material is ground to a ﬁne powder, and lipids
are extracted using 19:1 vol/vol chloroform–methanol

◦

Raw material, 
ingredient, or

ﬁnished product

Dry

Water

Dehydrated  

material

1. Grind 
2. Extract with 19:1 v/v CHCl3-MeOH 

Lipids and
lipid-soluble
components

Residue

Extract with 80% ethanol

Ion exchange

Mono-and
disaccharides

Residue

10-1
f i g u r e

Flow diagram for sample preparation and
extraction of mono- and disaccharides.

152

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

in a Soxhlet extractor (Chap. 8). (Note: Chloroform–
methanol forms an azeotrope boiling at 54
C with a
mole ratio of 0.642:0.358 or a vol/vol ratio of 3.5:1 in
the vapor.) Prior extraction of lipids makes extraction
of carbohydrates easier and more complete.

◦

However, other sample preparation schemes may
be required. For example, the AOAC International
method (3) for presweetened, ready-to-eat breakfast
cereals calls for removal of fats by extraction with
petroleum ether (hexane) rather than the method
described above and extraction of sugars with 50%
ethanol
rather than the
method described below.

(AOAC Method 982.14),

10.3 MONO- AND OLIGOSACCHARIDES

10.3.1 Extraction
Food raw materials and products and some ingredi-
ents are complex, heterogeneous, biological materials.
Thus, it is quite likely that they may contain substances
that interfere with measurement of the mono- and
oligosaccharides present, especially if a spectrophoto-
metric method is used. Interference may arise either
from compounds that absorb light of the same wave-
length used for the carbohydrate analysis or from
insoluble, colloidal material that scatters light, since
light scattering will be measured as absorbance. Also,
the aldehydo or keto group of the sugar can react with
other components, especially amino groups of pro-
teins, a reaction (the nonenzymatic browning or Mail-
lard reaction) that simultaneously produces color and
destroys the sugar. Even if chromatographic methods,
such as HPLC (Sect. 10.3.4.1), are used for analysis, the
mono- and oligosaccharides must usually be separated
from other components of the food before chromatog-
raphy. Thus, for determination of any mono- (glucose,
fructose), di- (sucrose,
lactose, maltose), tri- (rafﬁ-
nose), tetra- (stachyose), or other oligo- (maltodex-
trins) saccharides present, the dried, lipid-free sample
is extracted with hot 80% ethanol (ﬁnal concentra-
tion) in the presence of precipitated calcium carbon-
ate to neutralize any acidity (AOAC Method 922.02,
925.05). Higher oligosaccharides from added malto- or
fructooligosaccharides also may be extracted. Carbo-
hydrates are soluble in polar solvents. However, much
of the composition of a food (other than water) is in
the form of polymers, and almost all polysaccharides
and proteins are insoluble in hot 80% ethanol. Thus,
this extraction is rather speciﬁc. Extraction is done by a
batch process. Reﬂuxing for 1 h, cooling, and ﬁltering
is standard practice. (A Soxhlet apparatus cannot be
used because aqueous ethanol undergoes azeotropic
distillation as 95% ethanol.) Extraction should be done
at least twice to check for and ensure completeness of

extraction. If the foodstuff or food product is particu-
larly acidic, for example a low-pH fruit, neutralization
before extraction may be necessary to prevent hydrol-
ysis of sucrose, which is particularly acid labile; thus,
precipitated calcium carbonate is routinely added.

2−) or hydrogencarbonate (HCO3

The 80% ethanol extract will contain components
other than carbohydrates, in particular ash, pigments,
organic acids, and perhaps free amino acids and low-
molecular-weight peptides. Because the mono- and
oligosaccharides are neutral and the contaminants
are charged,
the contaminants can be removed by
ion-exchange techniques (Chap. 27). Because reduc-
ing sugars can be adsorbed onto and be isomerized
by strong anion-exchange resins in the hydroxide
form, a weak anion-exchange resin in the carbon-
−) form is
ate (CO3
used. [Reducing sugars are those mono- and oligosac-
charides that contain a free carbonyl (aldehydo or
keto) group and, therefore, can act as reducing agents;
see Sect. 10.3.3.] Because sucrose and sucrose-related
oligosaccharides are very susceptible to acid-catalyzed
hydrolysis, the anion-exchange resin should be used
before the cation-exchange resin. However, because
the anion-exchange resin is in a carbonate or hydro-
gencarbonate form, the cation-exchange resin (in H+
form) cannot be used in a column because of CO2 gen-
eration. Mixed-bed columns are not recommended for
the same reason. AOAC Method 931.02C reads basi-
cally as follows for cleanup of ethanol extracts: Place a
50-ml aliquot of the ethanol extract in a 250-ml Erlen-
meyer ﬂask. Add 3 g of anion-exchange resin (hydrox-
ide form) and 2 g of cation-exchange resin (acid form).
Let it stand for 2 h with occasional swirling.

◦

The aqueous alcohol of the ethanol extract is
removed under reduced pressure using a rotary evap-
orator (Fig. 10-2) and a temperature of 45–50
C. The
residue is dissolved in a known, measured amount of
water. Filtration should not be required, but should
be used if necessary. Some methods employ a ﬁnal
passage through a hydrophobic column such as a Sep-
Pak C18 cartridge (Waters Associates, Milford, MA)
as a ﬁnal cleanup step to remove any residual lipids,
proteins, and/or pigments, but this should not be nec-
essary if the lipids and lipid-soluble components were
properly removed prior to extraction. (Extracts may
contain minor carbohydrates, such as cyclitols and nat-
urally occurring or added sugar alcohols. These are
not considered in Sects. 10.3.2 or 10.3.3.)

10.3.2 Total Carbohydrate: Phenol-Sulfuric
Acid Method
10.3.2.1 PrincipleandCharacteristics
Carbohydrates are destroyed by strong acids and/or
high temperatures. Under these conditions, a series of

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

153

reproducible. Under proper conditions, the phenol-
sulfuric method is accurate to ±2%.

Neither this method nor those for measuring
reducing sugar content (Sect. 10.3.3) involves stoichio-
metric reactions. The extent of reaction is, in part, a
function of the structure of the sugar. Therefore, a
standard curve must be used. Ideally, the standard
curve will be prepared using mixtures of the same sug-
ars present in the same ratio as they are found in the
unknown. If this is not possible, for example, if a pure
preparation of the sugar being measured is not avail-
able, or if more than one sugar is present either as
free sugars in unknown proportions or as constituent
units of oligo- or polysaccharides or mixtures of them,
D-glucose is used to prepare the standard curve. In
these cases, accuracy is determined by conformity of
the standard curve made with D-glucose to the curve
that would be produced from the exact mixture of
carbohydrates being determined. In any analysis, the
concentrations used to construct the standard curve
must span the sample concentrations and beyond (i.e.,
all sample concentrations must fall within the limits of
the standard concentrations), and both must be within
the limits reported for sensitivity of the method. If any
concentrations are greater than the upper limit of the
sensitivity range, dilutions should be used.

The phenol-sulfuric acid procedure is often used
as a qualitative test for the presence of carbohydrate.
Neither sorbitol nor any other alditol (polyol, polyhy-
droxyalchol) gives a positive test.

10.3.2.2 OutlineofProcedure

1. A clear, aqueous solution of carbohydrate(s) is
transferred using a pipette into a small tube.
A blank of water also is prepared.

2. An aqueous solution of phenol is added, and

the contents are mixed.

3. Concentrated sulfuric acid is added rapidly to
the tube so that the stream produces good mix-
ing. The tube is agitated. (Adding the sulfuric
acid to the water produces considerable heat.)
A yellow-orange color results.

4. Absorbance is measured at 490 nm.
5. The average absorbance of the blanks is sub-
tracted, and the amount of sugar is determined
by reference to a standard curve.

10.3.3 Total Reducing Sugar
10.3.3.1 Somogyi–NelsonMethod
10.3.3.1.1 Principle Oxidation is a loss of electrons;
reduction is a gain of electrons. Reducing sugars are
those sugars that have an aldehydo group (aldoses)
that can give up electrons (i.e., act as a reducing agent)

10-2
f i g u r e

Diagram of a rotary evaporator. The solution to
be concentrated is placed in the round-bottom
Flask A in a water bath (E) at a controlled tem-
perature. The system is evacuated by means of
a water aspirator or pump; connecting tubing
is attached at the arrow. Flask (A) turns (gen-
erally slowly). Evaporation is relatively rapid
from a thin ﬁlm on the inside walls of ﬂask
(A) produced by its rotation because of the
reduced pressure, the large surface area, and
the elevated temperature. C is a condenser. D
is the motor. Condensate collects in ﬂask B.
The stopcock at the top of the condenser is for
releasing the vacuum.

complex reactions takes place, beginning with a simple
dehydration reaction as shown in Equation [1].

H H

C C

O H O H

H

C

C

O H

H2O

C H2

C

O

[1]
Continued heating in the presence of acid pro-
duces various furan derivatives (Fig. 10-3). These
products then condense with themselves and other
products to produce brown and black substances.
They will also condense with various phenolic
compounds,
resorcinol, orcinol,
α-naphthol, and napthoresorcinol, and with various
aromatic amines, such as aniline and o-toluidine, to
produce colored compounds that are useful for carbo-
hydrate analysis (3, 6).

such as phenol,

The most often used condensation is with phenol
itself (3, 7–10) (AOAC Method 44.1.30). This method
is simple, rapid, sensitive, accurate, speciﬁc for car-
bohydrates, and widely applied. The reagents are
inexpensive, readily available, and stable. Virtually
all classes of sugars, including sugar derivatives and
oligo- and polysaccharides, can be determined with
the phenol-sulfuric acid method. (Oligo- and polysac-
charides react because they undergo hydrolysis in the
presence of the hot, strong acid, releasing monosac-
charides.) A stable color is produced, and results are

154

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

10-3
f i g u r e

Furan products that could arise from, in order, pentoses and hexuronic acids, hexoses, 6-deoxyhexoses, and
ketohexoses (1).

to an oxidizing agent, which is reduced by receiving
the electrons. Oxidation of the aldehydo group pro-
duces a carboxylic acid group. Under alkaline condi-
tions, ketoses behave as weak reducing sugars because
they will partially isomerize to aldoses.

The most often used method to determine
amounts of reducing sugars is the Somogyi–Nelson
method (7, 11–14), also at times referred to as the
Nelson–Somogyi method. This and other reducing
sugar methods (Sect. 10.3.3.2) can be used in combi-
nation with enzymic methods (Sect. 10.3.4.3) for deter-
mination of oligo- and polysaccharides. In enzymic
methods, speciﬁc hydrolases are used to convert the
oligo- or polysaccharide into its constituent monosac-
charide or repeating oligosaccharide units, which are
measured using a reducing sugar method.

O

O

 

R   C   H + 2Cu(OH+)2 NaOH

R    C    O-Na++Cu2O+3H2O 
 
[2]
The Somogyi–Nelson method is based on the
reduction of Cu(II) ions to Cu(I) ions by reducing
sugars. The Cu(I) ions then reduce an arsenomolyb-
date complex, prepared by reacting ammonium
molybdate [(NH4)6Mo7O24] and sodium arsenate
(Na2HAsO7) in sulfuric acid. Reduction of
the
arsenomolybdate complex produces an intense, sta-
ble blue color that is measured spectrophotometrically.
This reaction is not stoichiometric and must be used
with a standard curve of the sugar(s) being determined
or D-glucose.

10.3.3.1.2 OutlineofProcedure

1. A solution of copper(II) sulfate and an alkaline
buffer are added by pipettes to a solution of
reducing sugars(s) and a water blank.

2. The resulting solution is heated in a boiling

water bath.

3. A reagent prepared by mixing solutions of
acidic ammonium molybdate and sodium arse-
nate is added.

4. After mixing, dilution, and remixing, absorb-

ance is measured at 520 nm.

5. After subtracting the absorbance of the reagent
blank, the A250 is converted into glucose equiv-
alents using a standard plot of micrograms of
glucose vs. absorbance.

10.3.3.2 OtherMethods(3)
The dinitrosalicylic acid method (15) will mea-
sure reducing sugars naturally occurring in foods or
released by enzymes, but is not much used. In this
reaction, 3,5-dinitrosalicylate is reduced to the reddish
monoamine derivative.

There are other methods that, like the Somogyi–
Nelson method, are based on the reduction of Cu(II)
ions in alkaline solution to Cu(I) ions that precipi-
tate as the brick-red oxide Cu2O. Tartrate or citrate
ions are added to keep the Cu(II) ions in solution
under the alkaline conditions. The Munson–Walker
method (AOAC Method 906.03) has various forms.
The precipitate of cuprous oxide can be determined
gravimetrically (AOAC Method 31.039), by titra-
tion with sodium thiosulfate (AOAC Method 31.040),
by titration with potassium permanganate (AOAC
Method 31.042), by titration in the presence of methy-
lene blue (the Lane–Eynon method; AOAC Method
923.09, 920.183b), and electrolytically (AOAC Method
31.044). These methods also must be used with stan-
dard curves because each reducing sugar reacts dif-
ferently. Because assay conditions affect the outcome,
they generally also must be done by trained, experi-
enced analysts so that they always are done in exactly
the same way. They are still used where speciﬁed.

A keto group cannot be oxidized to a carboxylic
acid group, and thus ketoses are not reducing sugars.
However, under the alkaline conditions employed,
ketoses are isomerized to aldoses (1) and, therefore, are
measured as reducing sugars. The response is less with
ketoses, so a standard curve made with D-fructose as
one of the sugars in the mixture of sugars should be
used if it is present.

Methods that both identify individual carbohy-
drates present and determine their amounts are pre-
ferred over general reducing sugar methods and are
described next.

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

155

10.3.4 Speciﬁc Analysis
of Mono- and Oligosaccharides
10.3.4.1 High-performanceLiquid
Chromatography
HPLC (Chap. 28) is the method of choice for analysis of
mono- and oligosaccharides and can be used for anal-
ysis of polysaccharides after hydrolysis (Sect. 10.4.2).
HPLC gives both qualitative analysis (identiﬁcation of
the carbohydrate) and, with peak integration, quanti-
tative analysis. HPLC analysis is rapid, can tolerate a
wide range of sample concentrations, and provides a
high degree of precision and accuracy. HPLC requires
no prior derivatization of carbohydrates, unlike GC
of sugars (Sect.10.3.4.2), but does require micron-
ﬁlter ﬁltration prior to injection. Complex mixtures
of mono- and oligosaccharides can be analyzed. The
basic principles and important parameters of HPLC
(the stationary phase, the mobile phase, and the detec-
tor) are presented and discussed in Chap. 28. Some
details related to carbohydrate analysis are discussed
here. Use of HPLC to determine soluble food and
other carbohydrates has been reviewed many times.
Selected reviews can be found in references (16–21).
Speciﬁc details of methods of analyses of speciﬁc food
ingredients or products should be obtained from the
literature. The USDA Food Safety and Inspection Ser-
vice recommends the use of HPLC for determination
of sugars and sugar alcohols in meat and poultry
products (22). Results of interlaboratory collaborative
studies done to validate the reproducibility of HPLC
methods are available (20, 23, 24).

10.3.4.1.1 Stationary Phases Stationary phases are
presented in probable order of use for carbohydrate
analysis.

1. Anion-exchange chromatography (AE-HPLC).
Carbohydrates have pKa values in the pH range 12–
14 and are, therefore, very weak acids. In a solution
of high pH, some carbohydrate hydroxyl groups are
ionized, allowing sugars to be separated on columns
of anion-exchange resins. Special column packings
have been developed for this purpose. The general
elution sequence is sugar alcohols (alditols), monosac-
charides, disaccharides, and higher oligosaccharides.
AE-HPLC is most often used in conjunction with
electrochemical detection (see Chap. 27 and Section
“Detectors”) (18–21, 23–27). AE-HPLC has been used
to examine the complex oligosaccharide patterns of
many food components and products. The method
has the advantage of being applicable to baseline
separation within each class of carbohydrates [see
Fig. 10-4 for separation of some monosaccharides,
disaccharides, alditols (sugar alcohols), and rafﬁnose]

10-4
f i g u r e

High-performance liquid chromatogram of
some common monosaccharides, disaccha-
rides, alditols, and the trisaccharide rafﬁnose
at equal wt/vol concentrations separated by
anion-exchange chromatography and detected
by pulsed amperometric detection (see Sect.
10.3.4.1.2). Peak 1, glycerol; 2, erythritol; 3,
L-rhammose; 4, D-glucitol (sorbitol); 5, man-
nitol; 6, L-arabinose; 7, D-glucose; 8, D-
galactose; 9, lactose; 10, sucrose; 11, rafﬁnose;
12, maltose.

and of providing separation of homologous series of
oligosaccharides into their components (27, 28).

2. Normal-phase chromatography (29). Normal-
phase chromatography is a widely used HPLC method
for carbohydrate analysis.
In normal-phase chro-
matography, the stationary phase is polar and elu-
tion is accomplished by employing a mobile phase of
increasing polarity. Silica gel that has been derivatized
with one or more of several reagents to incorporate
amino groups is often used. These so-called amine-
bonded stationary phases that are generally used with
acetonitrile–water (50–85% acetonitrile) as the eluent
are effective in carbohydrate separations. The elution
order is monosaccharides and sugar alcohols, disac-
charides, and higher oligosaccharides. Amine-bonded
silica gel columns have been used successfully to ana-
lyze the low-molecular-weight carbohydrate content
of foods (17).

A severe disadvantage of amine-bonded silica gel
is the tendency for reducing sugars to react with the
amino groups of the stationary phase, which results
in a deterioration of column performance over time
and loss of some of the carbohydrate being measured.
This situation can be partially alleviated through the
use of amine-modiﬁed silica gel columns. To prepare
amine-modiﬁed silica gel columns, small amounts of
modiﬁers, which are soluble amine compounds, are
added to the mobile phase to modify the packing
in situ. The modiﬁer must have at least two amino
groups, for one is needed to adsorb to the silica gel
and the other must be free to interact with the carbohy-
drate. Because the modiﬁer is in the eluent, the column
is continuously regenerated.

156

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

3. Cation-exchange chromatography. Micropar-
ticulate spheres of sulfonated resin are used for cation-
exchange stationary phases. The resin is loaded with
one of a variety of metal counter ions, depending on
the type of separation desired. Usually Ca2+, Pb2+, or
Ag+ is used as the counter ion. The mobile phase used
with these columns is water plus varying amounts
(typically <40%) of an organic solvent such as acetoni-
trile and/or methanol. These columns normally are
operated at elevated temperatures (>80
C) to increase
column efﬁciency by increasing the mass transfer
rate between the stationary and mobile phases which
effects peak narrowing and improved resolution (30).
Carbohydrate elution from cation-exchange resins
takes place in the order of decreasing molecular
weight. Oligosaccharides with a degree of polymer-
ization (DP) greater than 3 elute ﬁrst, followed by
trisaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and
alditols. There is some resolution of disaccharides,
but the real strength of this stationary phase is in the
separation of individual monosaccharides.

◦

4. Reversed-phase chromatography. In reversed-
phase chromatography,
the stationary phase is
hydrophobic, and the mobile phase is largely water.
The hydrophobic stationary phase is made by react-
ing silica gel with a reagent that adds alkyl chains,
such as an 18-carbon-atom alkyl chain (a C18 col-
umn) or a phenyl group (a phenyl column). Reversed-
phase chromatography has been used for separation
of mono-, di-, and trisaccharides by groups (31, 32)
(Fig. 10-5).

A major disadvantage of this stationary phase is
the short retention times of monosaccharides, which

result in elution as a single unresolved peak. The addi-
tion of salts (such as sodium chloride) can increase
retention on the stationary phase and the utility of
this method for monosaccharide analysis. Reversed-
phase chromatography is complicated by peak dou-
bling and/or peak broadening due to the presence of
anomers. This problem can be alleviated by the addi-
tion of an amine to the mobile phase to accelerate
mutarotation (anomerization), but separation may be
negatively affected by the shorter retention times that
usually result.

A wide variety of stationary phases is available,
including phases not included in one of the four
groups given above, and new improved phases con-
tinue to be developed. Both normal- and reversed-
phase columns have long lives, have good stability
over a wide range of solvent compositions and pH
values (from pH 2 to pH 10), are suitable for the sepa-
ration of a range of carbohydrates, and are of relatively
low cost. All silica-based stationary phases share the
disadvantage that silica dissolves to a small extent in
water-rich eluents.

10.3.4.1.2 Detectors Detectors and their limitations
and detector limits have been reviewed (19).

1. Refractive index detection. The refractive
index (RI) detector is commonly employed for carbo-
hydrate analysis (33) (Sect. 10.6.4). RI measurements
are linear over a wide range of carbohydrate concen-
trations and can be universally applied to all carbo-
hydrates, but the RI detector has its drawbacks. RI is
a bulk physical property that is sensitive to changes

10-5
f i g u r e

High-performance, reversed-phase liquid chromatogram of maltodextrins (DP 1–9). [From (32), used with
permission.]

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

157

in ﬂow, pressure, and temperature; but with mod-
ern HPLC equipment and a temperature-controlled
detector, problems arising from these changes can be
minimized. The most signiﬁcant limiting factor with
RI detection is that gradient elution cannot be used.
The other is that, since an RI detector measures mass,
it is not sensitive to low concentrations.

2.

The

Electrochemical detection.

triple-
called a pulsed-
pulsed electrochemical detector,
(PAD), which relies on
amperometric detector
oxidation of carbohydrate hydroxyl and aldehydo
groups,
is universally used with AE-HPLC (18–
21, 23–27, 34). It requires a high pH. Gradient and
graded elutions can be used with the PAD. The sol-
vents employed are simple and inexpensive (sodium
hydroxide solution, with or without sodium acetate).
(Water may be used, but when it is, postcolumn addi-
tion of a sodium hydroxide solution is required.) The
detector is suitable for both reducing and nonre-
ducing carbohydrates. Limits are approximately
1.5 ng for monosaccharides and 5 ng for di-, tri-, and
tetrasaccharides.

3. Postcolumn derivatization (35). The purpose
of pre- and postcolumn derivatization is to increase
detection sensitivity by addition of a substituent
whose concentration can be measured using an ultra-
violet (UV) or ﬂuorescence detector. However, with
the development of the PAD detector, neither pre- nor
postcolumn derivatization is much used. Postcolumn
derivatization involves addition of reagents that will
provide compounds whose concentration can be mea-
sured using absorbance (visible) or ﬂuorescence detec-
tion. It is straightforward; requires only one or two
additional pumps, a mixing coil, and a thermostatted
bath; and provides greater sensitivity than does an RI
detector.

4. Precolumn derivatization (35). Precolumn
derivatization reactions must be
stoichiometric.
Oligosaccharides derivatized with aromatic groups
are often separated with higher
resolution in
normal-phase HPLC.

10.3.4.2 GasChromatography
GC (gas-liquid chromatography, GLC), like HPLC,
provides both qualitative and quantitative analysis of
carbohydrates. For GC, sugars must be converted into
volatile derivatives. The most commonly used deriva-
tives are the alditol peracetates (and aldonic acid per-
trimethylsilyl ethers from uronic acids) (36–39). These
derivatives are prepared as illustrated in Fig. 10-6 for
D-galactose and D-galacturonic acid. Conversion of
sugars into peracetylated aldononitrile (aldoses) and

peracetylated ketooxime (ketoses) derivatives for GC
has also been done (40), although this procedure is not
used nearly as much as the preparation of peracety-
lated aldoses and aldonic acids. A ﬂame ionization
detector is the detector of choice for peracetylated
carbohydrate derivatives.

The most serious problem with GC for carbo-
hydrate analysis is that two preparation steps are
involved: reduction of aldehyde groups to primary
alcohol groups and conversion of the reduced sugar
into a volatile peracetate ester or pertrimethylsilyl
ether derivative. Of course, for the analysis to be suc-
cessful, each of these steps must be 100% complete
(i.e., stoichiometric). The basic principles and impor-
tant parameters of GC (the stationary phase, temper-
ature programming, and detection) are presented and
discussed in Chap. 29.

10.3.4.2.1 Neutral Sugars: Outline of Procedure (38)

1. Reduction to alditols. Neutral sugars from the
80% ethanol extract (Sect. 10.3.1) or from hydrolysis of
a polysaccharide (see Sects. 10.4.2.2 and “Overview”)
are reduced with an excess of sodium or potassium
borohydride dissolved in dilute ammonium hydrox-
ide solution. After reaction at 40
C, glacial acetic acid
is added dropwise until no more hydrogen is evolved.
This treatment destroys excess borohydride. The acid-
iﬁed solution is evaporated to dryness. Borate ions
may be removed as methyl borate by successive addi-
tions and evaporation of methanol, but this step is not
necessary.

◦

A potential problem is that, if fructose is present,
either as a naturally occurring sugar, from the hydrol-
ysis of inulin, or as an additive [from high fructose
syrup (HFS), invert sugar, or honey], it will be reduced
to a mixture of D-glucitol (sorbitol) and D-mannitol
(Fig. 10-7).

2. Acetylation of alditols. Acetic anhydride and
1-methylimidazole (as a catalyst) are added. After
10 min at room temperature, water and dichloro-
methane are added. The dichloromethane layer is
washed with water and evaporated to dryness. The
residue of alditol peracetates is dissolved in a polar
organic solvent (usually acetone) for chromatography.

3. GC of alditol peracetates (38, 39). Alditol
acetates may be chromatographed isothermally and
identiﬁed by their retention times relative to that of
inositol hexaacetate, inositol being added as an inter-
nal standard prior to acetylation. It is wise to run
standards of the additol peracetates of the sugars being
determined with inositol hexaacetate as an internal
standard.

158

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

NaBH4

HC

O

HCOH

HOCH

HOCH

HCOH

CH2OH
D-Galactose

HC

O

HCOH

HOCH

HOCH

NaBH4

HCOH

CO2

– Na+

D-Galacturonic
Acid, Sodium salt

CH2OH

HCOH

HOCH

HOCH

HCOH

CH2OH

D-Galactitol

CH2OH

HCOH

HOCH

HOCH

HCOH

CO2

– Na+

CH2OAc

HC OAc

Ac2O

AcO CH

AcO CH

O

C

CH3

Ac =

HCOAc

CH2OAc

D-Galactitol
pentaacetate

CO2

– Na+

Me3Si-NH-SiMe3

HOCH

HCOH

HCOH

HO CH

CH2OH

TMS =

Si(CH3)3

CO2TMS

TMSOCH

HCOTMS

HCOTMS

TMSOCH

CH2OTMS

L-Galactonic

Acid, Sodium salt

Trimethylsilyl L-Galactonate
Penta(trimethylsilyl) Ether

Modiﬁcation of D-galactose and D-galacturonic acid in preparation for gas chromatography.

HOCH

NaBH4

10-6
f i g u r e

CH2OH

C

O

HCOH

HCOH

CH2OH
D-Fructose

10-7
f i g u r e

CH2OH

HCOH

HOCH

HCOH

HCOH

CH2OH

D-Glucitol

CH2OH

HOCH

HOCH

HCOH

HCOH

CH2OH

D-Mannitol

Reduction of D-fructose to a mixture of
alditols.

10.3.4.2.2 Hydrolyzates of Polysaccharides Contain-
ing Uronic Acids: Outline of Procedure (41) A
method different from that used for neutral sugars
(Sect. 10.3.4.2.1) is required when uronic acids are
present.

1. Reduction. As with hydrolyzates containing
only neutral sugars, the hydrolyzate is evaporated to
dryness. The residue is dissolved in sodium carbonate
solution and treated with an excess of sodium borohy-
dride. Excess borohydride is decomposed by addition
of glacial acetic acid; borate may be removed by addi-
tion and evaporation of methanol (Sect. 10.3.4.2.1).
This procedure reduces uronic acids to aldonic acids
and aldoses to alditols (Fig. 6).

2.

and

Preparation

chromatography

of
trimethylsilyl (TMS) derivatives. The aldonic acids
are converted into per-TMS ethers rather than per-
acetate esters (Fig. 10-6). Trimethylsilyation of free
aldonic acids gives derivatives of lactones (predom-
inately the 1,4-lactone), while trimethylsilyation of
the sodium salt produces the ester. Several proce-
dures and packaged reagents have been developed
for this etheriﬁcation. The reaction mixture is injected
directly into the chromatograph. Temperature pro-
gramming is required. Components are identiﬁed by
their retention times.

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

159

10.3.4.3 EnzymicMethods
10.3.4.3.1 Overview The method of choice for the
determination of starch employs a combination of
enzymes in sequential enzyme-catalyzed reactions
and is speciﬁc for starch, as long as puriﬁed enzyme
preparations are used (Sect. 10.4.1.1).

Other enzymic methods for the determination of
carbohydrates have been developed (Table 10-3) [see
also Equation (3) and Chap. 16]. They are often, but not
always, speciﬁc for the substance being measured. Kits
for several enzymic methods have been developed and
marketed. The kits contain speciﬁc enzymes, other
required reagents, buffer salts, and detailed instruc-
tions that must be followed because enzyme concen-
tration, substrate concentration, concentration of other
required reagents, pH, and temperature all affect reac-
tion rates and results. A good description of a method
will point out any interferences and other limitations.
Limits of detection by methods involving enzyme-
or coupled enzyme-catalyzed reactions are generally
low. In addition, enzymic methods are usually quite
speciﬁc for a speciﬁc carbohydrate, although not
always 100% speciﬁc. However, it is not often that
determination of a single component is desired, the
notable exception being the determination of starch
(Sect. 10.4.1.1). Other exceptions are the identiﬁca-
tion and quantitative determination of β-glucan and
inulin. Thus, chromatographic methods (Sects. 10.3.4.1
and 10.3.4.2) that give values for each of the sugars
present are preferred.

10.3.4.3.2 Sample Preparation It sometimes is rec-
ommended that
the Carrez treatment (7), which
breaks emulsions, precipitates proteins, and absorbs
some colors, be applied to food products prior to
determination of carbohydrates by enzymic methods.
The Carrez treatment involves addition of a solu-
tion of potassium hexacyanoferrate (K4[Fe(CN)6],
potassium ferrocyanide), followed by addition of a
solution of zinc sulfate (ZnSO4), followed by addition
of a solution of sodium hydroxide. The suspension
is ﬁltered, and the clear ﬁltrate is used directly in
enzyme-catalyzed assays.

10.3.4.3.3 EnzymicDeterminationof D-Glucose The
enzyme glucose oxidase oxidizes D-glucose quan-
titatively to D-glucono-1,5-lactone (glucono-delta-
lactone), the other product being hydrogen peroxide
(Fig. 10-8). To measure the amount of D-glucose
present, peroxidase is added along with a colorless
compound that can be oxidized to a colored com-
pound. In a second enzyme-catalyzed reaction, the
leuco dye is oxidized to a colored compound which
is measured spectrophotometrically. Various dyes are

10-3
table

Selected Enzymic Methods
of Carbohydrate Analysis

Carbohydrate

Reference

KitForma

Using glucose oxidase

(43),

Sect. 10.3.4.3.3

(42, 43)

Monosaccharides
Pentoses

L-Arabinose
D-Xylose

Hexoses

D-Fructose
D-Galactose
D-Galacturonic acid
D-Glucose

Using glucose

dehydrogenase
Using glucokinase

(hexokinase)

D-Mannose

Monosaccharide

derivatives
D-Gluconate/D-glucono-δ-

lactone

D-Glucitol/sorbitol
D-Mannitol
Xylitol

Oligosaccharides

Lactose
Maltose
Sucrose
Rafﬁnose, stachyose,

verbascose

Polysaccharides

Amylose, amylopectin
(contents and ratio)

locust bean gums)

Cellulose
Galactomannans (guar and
β-Glucan (mixed-linkage)
Glycogen
Hemicellulose
Inulin
Pectin/poly(D-galacturonic

acid)
Starch

(42, 43)
(42, 43)

(42, 43)
(42, 43)
(42)

(42, 43)

(42, 43)

(42, 43)

(42, 43)
(42, 43)
(42, 43)

(42, 43)
(42, 43)
(42, 43)
(42, 43)

(42, 43)
(42)

(42)
(42, 43)
(42, 43)
(42, 43)
(42, 43)

Sect. 10.4.1.1

(42, 43)

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x
x

x

x

x

x

aAvailable in kit
Megazyme, and Sigma-Aldrich.

form from companies such as R-Biopharm,

used in commercial kits. The method using this com-
bination of two enzymes and an oxidizable colorless
compound is known as the GOPOD (glucose oxidase-
peroxidase) method.

10.3.4.4 MassSpectrometry
There are many different variations of mass spectrom-
etry (MS) (Chap. 26). With carbohydrates most of the
techniques are used for structural analysis; MS has

160

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

10.4 POLYSACCHARIDES

10.4.1 Starch
Starch is second only to water as the most abundant
component of food. Starch is found in all parts of
plants (leaves, stems, roots, tubers, seeds). A variety of
commercial starches are available worldwide as food
additives. These include corn (maize), waxy maize,
high-amylose corn (amylomaize), potato, wheat, rice,
tapioca (cassava), arrowroot, and sago starches. In
addition, starch is the main component of wheat, rye,
barley, oat, rice, corn, mung bean, and pea ﬂours
and certain roots and tubers such as potatoes, sweet
potatoes, and yams.

10.4.1.1 TotalStarch
10.4.1.1.1 Principle The only reliable method for
determination of total starch is based on complete
conversion of the starch into D-glucose by puriﬁed
enzymes speciﬁc for starch and determination of the D-
glucose released by an enzyme speciﬁc for it (Fig. 10-8)
(see also Chap. 16).

10.4.1.1.2 Potential Problems Starch-hydrolyzing
enzymes (amylases) must be puriﬁed to eliminate any
other enzymic activity that would release D-glucose
(e.g., cellulases, invertase or sucrase, β-glucanase) and
catalase, which would destroy the hydrogen perox-
ide on which the enzymic determination of D-glucose
depends (Sect. 10.3.4.3.3). The former contamination
would give false high values and the latter, false low
values. Even with puriﬁed enzymes, problems can be
encountered with this method. It may not be quan-
titative for high-amylose or another starch at least
partially resistant
to enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis.
Resistant starch (RS), by deﬁnition, is composed of
starch and starch-degradation products that escape
digestion in the small intestine (48). There are gen-
erally considered to be four starch sources that are
resistant to digestion or so slowly digested that they
pass through the small intestine:

1. Starch that is physically inaccessible to amy-
lases because it is trapped within a food matrix
(RS1),

2. Starch that resists enzyme-catalyzed hydroly-
sis because of the nature of the starch granule
(uncooked starch) (RS2),

3. Retrograded starch (i.e., starch polymers that
have recrystallized after gelatinization of the
granules, e.g., cooled cooked potatoes contain
resistant starch) (Sect. 10.4.1.3) (RS3), and

4. Starch that has been modiﬁed structurally in
such a way as to make it less susceptible to
digestion (RS4).

10-8
f i g u r e

Coupled enzyme-catalyzed reactions for the
determination of D-glucose.

been used for analysis of carbohydrates, but not in a
routine manner (44). Particularly useful is the matrix-
(MALDI-
assisted laser desorption time-of-ﬂight
TOF) technique for analysis of a homologous series of
oligosaccharides (Fig. 10-9). A comparison was made
between anion-exchange HPLC (Sect. 10.3.4.1) (the
most used carbohydrate analysis technique today),
capillary electrophoresis (Sect. 10.3.4.6), and MALDI-
TOF mass spectrometry for the analysis of mal-
tooligosaccharides, with the conclusion that the latter
technique gave the best results (28).

10.3.4.5 Thin-layerChromatography
Thin-layer chromatography has been used for identi-
ﬁcation and quantitation of the sugars present in the
molasses from sugar beet and cane processing (45).
It is particularly useful for rapid screening of several
samples simultaneously.

10.3.4.6 CapillaryElectrophoresis(46,47)
Capillary zone electrophoresis (Chap. 15) has also
been used to separate and measure carbohydrates,
but because carbohydrates lack chromophores, pre-
column derivatization and detection with a UV or
ﬂuorescence detector is required (35). Generally, this
method provides no advantage over HPLC methods
for carbohydrate analysis.

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

161

10-9
f i g u r e

MALDI-TOF mass spectrum of maltooligosaccharides produced by hydrolysis of starch. Numbers indicate DP. IS,
internal standard. [From (28), used with permission, Copyright Springer-Verlag, 1998.]

Total Starch

Starch: Degree of Gelatinization

Starch

Gelatinize

Starch solution

Starch solution/suspension 

Digest with a
debranching enzyme

Linear segments of amylose
and amylopectin 

Digest with α-amylase

Digest with β-amylase

Linear and branched
fragments of amylose
and amylopectin

Maltose (primarily)

Determine reducing sugars

Digest with glucoamylase

D-Glucose

1) Treat with glucose oxidase
2) Treat with peroxidase and
    a leuco dye

Color proportional to the
amount of D-glucose released

Compare value with that obtained 

for completely gelatinized starch

10-10
f i g u r e

Flow diagrams for determination of
total
starch (Sect. 10.4.1.1) and determination of the
degree of starch gelatinization (Sect. 10.4.1.2).

RS is at best only partially converted into D-glucose by
the method described below to measure starch; rather
most of it is usually included in the analysis for dietary
ﬁber (Sect. 10.5.4.1).

One method of starch analysis purports to over-
come at least the ﬁrst three of these problems (49). In it,
the starch is dispersed in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
and then is converted quantitatively to D-glucose by
treatment with a thermostable α-amylase to effect
depolymerization and solubilization of
the starch
(Fig. 10-10). Glucoamylase (amyloglucosidase) effects

quantitative conversion of the fragments produced
by the action of α-amylase into D-glucose. D-glucose
is determined with a glucose oxidase-peroxidase
(GOPOD) reagent (Sect. 10.3.4.3.3) (AOAC Method
969.39; AACC Method 76-13). This reagent contains
a colorless (leuco) dye that is oxidized to a colored
compound by the hydrogen peroxide (produced by
the glucose oxidase-catalyzed oxidation of glucose,
Fig. 10-8) in a reaction catalyzed by peroxidase. The
method determines total starch. It does not reveal
the botanical source of the starch or whether it is
native starch or modiﬁed food starch. The botanical
source of the starch may be determined microscopi-
cally (Sect. 10.6.1) if the material being analyzed has
not been cooked. Some information about modiﬁca-
tion also may be determined with a microscope.

10.4.1.1.3 OutlineofProcedure

1. A sample of ﬁnely milled material is placed in
a glass test tube and wetted with 80% vol/vol
ethanol. DMSO is added to the ethanol-wetted
sample, and the contents of the tube are mixed
vigorously. The tube is then heated in a boiling
water bath.

2. A buffered solution of

thermostable
α-amylase is added. Tube contents are vortex
mixed, and the tube is returned to the boiling
water bath.

a

3. After 5 min,

the tube is brought

C.
Sodium acetate buffer, pH 4.5, and glucoamy-
lase (amyloglucosidase) solution is added, and
the contents are mixed. The tube then is incu-
bated at 50

to 50

C.

◦

4. The tube contents are transferred quantitatively
to a volumetric ﬂask using distilled water to

◦

162

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

wash the tube and to adjust the contents to
volume.

5. After thorough mixing of the ﬂask, aliquots are
removed, treated with GOPOD reagent, and
incubated at 50
C. Absorbance of the test sam-
ple and a reagent blank is measured at the
wavelength required by the GOPOD reagent
being used.

◦

starch, is acted on very slowly by the combination
of pullulanase plus β-amylase. Therefore, the basic
method described in Sect. 10.4.1.2 can be used to deter-
mine retrogradation. The decrease in reducing power
(from maltose released by action of the enzyme com-
bination) after storage is a measure of the amount of
retrograded starch at the time of analysis and/or the
degree of retrogradation.

Glucose and a starch low in protein and lipid con-
tent (such as potato starch) are used as standards after
determination of their moisture contents. Addition
of DMSO can be omitted, and diluted thermostable
α-amylase solution can be added directly to the
ethanol-wetted sample if it is known from experience
that no starch resistant to the α-amylase under the con-
ditions used is present in the samples being analyzed.

10.4.1.2 DegreeofGelatinizationofStarch
When starch granules are heated in water to a temper-
ature speciﬁc for the starch being cooked, they swell,
lose their crystallinity and birefringence, and become
much more susceptible to enzyme-catalyzed hydroly-
sis. Heating starch in water produces phenomena that
result from two processes: gelatinization and past-
ing, often together referred to simply as gelatinization,
which are very important in determining the texture
and digestibility of foods containing starch.

Several methods have been developed that make
use of the fact that certain enzymes act much more
rapidly on cooked starch than they do on native starch.
A particularly sensitive method employs a combina-
tion of pullulanase and β-amylase, neither of which
is able to act on uncooked starch granules (50). With
gelatinized or pasted starch, the enzyme pullulanase
debranches amylopectin and any branched amylose
molecules, giving a mixture of linear segments of vari-
ous sizes. (Another debranching enzyme, isoamylase,
may also be used.) β-Amylase then acts on the linear
chains, releasing the disaccharide maltose, starting at
the nonreducing ends (Fig. 10-10) and a small amount
of maltotriose (from chains containing an odd num-
ber of glucosyl units). The degree of gelatinization
is determined by measuring the amount of reducing
sugar formed (Sect. 10.3.3).

10.4.1.3 DegreeofRetrogradationofStarch
Upon storage of a product containing cooked starch,
the two starch polymers, amylose and amylopectin,
associate with themselves and with each other, form-
ing polycrystalline arrays. This process of reordering is
called retrogradation. (Retrogradation is a contribut-
ing factor to the staling of bread and other bakery
products, for example.) Retrograded starch, like native

10.4.2 Nonstarch Polysaccharides
(Hydrocolloids/Food Gums)
10.4.2.1 Overview
A starch (or starches) may be used as ingredients in a
food product, either as isolated starch or as a compo-
nent of a ﬂour, or may occur naturally in a fruit or veg-
etable tissue. Other polysaccharides are almost always
added as ingredients, although there are exceptions.
These added polysaccharides, along with the protein
gelatin, comprise the group of ingredients known as
food gums or hydrocolloids. Their use is widespread
and extensive. They are used in everything from pro-
cessed meat products to chocolate products, from ice
cream to salad dressings.

Analytical methods are required for these polysac-
charides to enable both suppliers and food processors
to determine the purity of a gum product, to ensure
that label declarations of processors are correct, and
to monitor that hydrocolloids have not been added to
standardized products in which they are not allowed.
It also may be desirable to determine such things as the
β-glucan content of oat or barley ﬂour or a breakfast
cereal for a label claim or the arabinoxylan content of
wheat ﬂour to set processing parameters. Another pro-
cessor may want to determine other polysaccharides
not declared on the ingredient label, such as those
introduced by microorganisms during fermentation in
making yogurt and yogurt-based products.

Food gum analysis

is problematic because
polysaccharides present a variety of chemical struc-
tures,
solubilities, and molecular weights. Plant
polysaccharides do not have uniform, repeating-unit
structures; rather the structure of a speciﬁc polysac-
charide such as κ-carrageenan varies from molecule
to molecule. In addition, the average structure can
vary with the source and the conditions under which
the plant is grown. Some polysaccharides are neutral;
some are anionic. Some are linear; some are branched.
Some of the branched polysaccharides are still effec-
tively linear; some are bushlike. Some contain ether,
ester, and/or cyclic acetal groups in addition to sugar
units, either naturally or as a result of chemical mod-
iﬁcation. Some are soluble only in hot water; some
are soluble only in room temperature or colder water;
some are soluble in both hot and cold water, and some

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

163

require aqueous solutions of acids, bases, or metal
ion-chelating compounds to dissolve them. And all
polysaccharide preparations are composed of a mix-
ture of molecules with a range of molecular weights.
All this structural diversity complicates qualitative
analysis of food gums when their nature is unknown
or when more than one is present, and structural
heterogeneity complicates quantitative analysis of a
speciﬁc gum.

Current methods depend on extraction of the
gum(s), followed by fractionation of the extract. Frac-
tionation invariably results in some loss of material.
Most often, an isolated gum is identiﬁed by identify-
ing and quantitating its constituent sugars after acid-
catalyzed hydrolysis. However, sugars are released
from polysaccharides by hydrolysis at different rates
and are destroyed by hot acids at different rates, so
the exact monosaccharide composition of a polysac-
charide may be difﬁcult to determine. Problems asso-
ciated with the determination of gums in foods and
various procedures that have been used for their mea-
surement have been reviewed (51, 52).
Qualitative identiﬁcation tests,

speciﬁcations,
and analytical methods for many food-approved
gums/hydrocolloids,
including modiﬁed starches,
have been established for the United States (53) and
Europe (54). None of the qualitative methods is con-
clusive. AOAC International has established methods
for analysis of some speciﬁc food products. But not
all gums approved for food use are included; not all
methods that determine total gums can be used if
starch is present; and not all methods can be used to
determine all gums. Hydrocolloid/gum suppliers and
food processors usually have their own speciﬁcations
of purity and properties.

10.4.2.2 Hydrocolloid/FoodGumContent
Determination
Several schemes, some published, some unpublished,
have been developed for analysis of food products
for food gums. Most are targeted to a speciﬁc group
of food products, as it is difﬁcult, perhaps impossi-
ble, to develop a universal scheme. A general scheme
that is reported to work successfully (41) is presented
here. Figure 10-11 presents the scheme for isolation
and puriﬁcation of nonstarch, water-soluble polysac-
charides. Letters in the parentheses below refer to the
same letters in Fig. 10-11. Many of the steps in the
method utilize principles previously described.

(a) It is usually difﬁcult to extract polysaccha-
rides quantitatively when fats, oils, waxes,
and proteins are present. Therefore,
lipid-
soluble substances are removed ﬁrst. Before
this can be effected, the sample must be dried.
Freeze drying is recommended. If the dried

it must be ground
material contains lumps,
to a ﬁne powder. A known weight of dry
sample is placed in a Soxhlet apparatus, and
the lipid-soluble substances are removed with
19:1 vol/vol chloroform–methanol (see note in
Sect. 10.2). (n-Hexane has also been used.) Sol-
vent is removed from the sample by air drying
in a hood, then by placing the sample in a
desiccator, which is then evacuated.

(b) Although not in the published scheme, solu-
ble sugars, other low-molecular-weight com-
pounds, and ash can be removed at
this
point using hot 80% ethanol as described
in Sect. 10.3.1.
(Hot 80% methanol has also
been used.)
(c) Protein is

removed by enzyme-catalyzed
hydrolysis. The cited procedure (41) uses
papain as the protease. Bacterial alkaline pro-
teases are recommended by some because
carbohydrases have acidic pH optima. How-
ever, one must always be aware of the fact that
commercial enzyme preparations, especially
those from bacteria or fungi, almost always
have carbohydrase activities in addition to pro-
teolytic activity.
In this procedure, proteins
are denatured for easier digestion by disper-
sion of the sample in sodium acetate buffer,
pH 6.5, containing sodium chloride and heating
the mixture. Papain [activated by dispersing
it in sodium acetate buffer, pH 6.5, contain-
ing cysteine and ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA)] is added to the sample, and the
mixture is incubated.

(d) Any solubilized polysaccharides are precipi-
tated by addition of sodium chloride to the
cooled dispersion, followed by the addition of
four volumes of absolute ethanol (to give an
ethanol concentration of 75%). The mixture is
centrifuged.

(e) The pellet is suspended in acetate buffer, usu-
ally pH 4.5. To this suspension is added
a freshly prepared solution of glucoamylase
(amyloglucosidase) in the same buffer. This
suspension is then incubated. Just as in the
analysis of starch, highly puriﬁed enzyme must
be used to minimize hydrolytic breakdown
of other polysaccharides (Sect. 10.4.1.1.2). This
step may be omitted if it is known that no starch
is present. Centrifugation after removal of
starch isolates and removes insoluble ﬁber (cel-
lulose, some hemicelluloses, lignin) (Sect. 10.5).
The presence of starch can be tested for
by adding a solution of iodine and potassium
iodide and observing the color. A color change
to blue or brownish-red indicates the presence
of starch. A microscope may be used to look
for stained intact or swollen granules or granule

164

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

Sample

Freeze dry (a)

Dry sample

Extract lipid (a)

Fat-free sample aqueous ethanol extract (b)

Digest with a protease (c)

Protein-free sample

Soluble sugars, other
low-molecular-weight
compounds, and ash 

Add NaCl and ethanol and centrifuge (d)

Polysaccharide precipitate

Remove starch via digestion (e)

Starch-free sample

Centrifuge (e)

Residue

(Insoluble ﬁber)

Solubles

(Soluble ﬁber + starch hydrolysis products)

Add NaCl and ethanol and centrifuge (f)

Polysaccharide precipitate

Dissolve, dialyze, and freeze dry (g)

Dry polysaccharide extract

Hydrolyze (h)

Derivatize

HPLC
analysis

GC
analysis

10-11
f i g u r e

Flow diagram for isolation and analysis of polysaccharides.

fragments (Sect. 10.6.1). However, unless a def-
inite blue color appears, the test may be incon-
clusive. A better check is to analyze the ethanol-
soluble fraction from step (f) for the presence of
glucose (Sect. 10.3.4). If no glucose is found, the
starch digestion part of step (e) may be omitted
in future analyses of the same product.

(f) Solubilized polysaccharides are reprecipitated
by addition of sodium chloride to the cooled
dispersion, followed by the addition of four
volumes of absolute ethanol (to give an ethanol
concentration of 75%). The mixture is cen-
trifuged. The precipitate (pellet) of water-
soluble polysaccharides (often added hydro-
colloids/food gums) is soluble dietary ﬁber
(Sect. 10.5).

(g) The pellet is suspended in deionized water,
transferred to dialysis tubing, and dialyzed
against
frequent changes of sodium azide

solution (used to prevent microbial growth).
Finally, dialysis against deionized water is
done to remove the sodium azide. The reten-
tate is recovered from the dialysis tubing and
freeze dried.

to constituent monosaccharides

(h) Polysaccharide identiﬁcation relies on hydrol-
ysis
and
identiﬁcation of these sugars (Sect. 10.3.4). For
hydrolysis, polysaccharide material is added
to a Teﬂon-lined, screw-capped vial. Triﬂuo-
roacetic acid solution is added (usually 2 M),
and the vial is tightly capped and heated (usu-
ally for 2 h at 120
C). After cooling, the contents
are evaporated to dryness in a hood with a
stream of air or nitrogen. Then, sugars are
determined by HPLC (Sect. 10.3.4.1) or GC
(Sect. 10.3.4.2). If GC is used, inositol is added
as an internal standard. Qualitative and quan-
titative analysis of the polysaccharides present

◦

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

165

can be determined by sugar analysis. For exam-
ple, guaran, the polysaccharide component of
guar gum, yields D-mannose and D-galactose
in an approximate molar ratio of 1.00:0.56.

The described acid-catalyzed hydrolysis
procedure does not release uronic acids quan-
titatively. The presence of uronic acids can
be indicated by either the modiﬁed carbazole
assay (55, 56), the m-hydroxydiphenyl assay
(11, 57, 58), or the 3,5-dimethylphenol assay
(58). All three methods are based on the same
principle as the phenol-sulfuric acid assay
(Sect. 10.3.2) (i.e., condensation of dehydration
products with a phenolic compound to pro-
duce colored compounds that can be measured
quantitatively by means of spectrophotometry).

10.4.2.3 Pectin
10.4.2.3.1 Natureof Pectin Even though pectin is a
very important food polysaccharide, no ofﬁcial meth-
ods for its determination have been established. What
few methods have been published basically involve its
precipitation (by addition of ethanol) from jams, jellies,
etc. in which it is the only polysaccharide present.

Even the deﬁnition of pectin is

somewhat
ambiguous. What may be called “pectin” in a native
fruit or vegetable is a complex mixture of polysaccha-
rides whose structures depend on the source, includ-
ing the stage of development (degree of ripeness)
of the particular fruit or vegetable. Generally, much
of this native material can be described as a main
chain of α-D-galactopyranosyluronic acid units (some
of which are in the methyl ester form) interrupted by
L-rhamnopyranosyl units (1, 2). Many of the rham-
nosyl units have arabinan, galactan, or arabinogalac-
tan chains attached to them. Other sugars, such as
D-apiose, also are present. In the manufacture of com-
mercial pectin, much of the neutral sugar part is
removed. Commercial pectin is, therefore, primarily
poly(α-D-galacturonic acid methyl ester) with various
degrees of esteriﬁcation and sometimes amidation.

Enzyme action during development/ripening or
during processing can partially deesterify and/or
depolymerize native pectin. These enzyme-catalyzed
reactions are important determinants of the stability
of fruit juices, tomato sauce, tomato paste, apple but-
ter, etc. in which some of the texture/body is supplied
by pectin and its interaction with calcium ions. It is
probable that the fact that pectin is not a single sub-
stance has precluded development of methods for its
determination (see also Sect. 10.5.2.1.3).

10.4.2.3.2 Pectin Content Determination The con-
stant in pectins is D-galacturonic acid as the principal

component (often at least 80%). However, glycosidic
linkages of uronic acids are difﬁcult to hydrolyze
without decomposition, so methods involving acid-
catalyzed hydrolysis to release D-galacturonic acid
and chromatography are generally not applicable.

One method employed for pectin uses saponi-
ﬁcation in sodium hydroxide solution, followed by
acidiﬁcation, and addition of Ca2+ to precipitate the
pectin. Calcium pectate is collected, washed, dried,
and measured gravimetrically. Precipitation with the
quaternary ammonium salt cetylpyridinium bromide
has been used successfully because there is a much
lower critical electrolyte concentration for its salt for-
mation with pectin than with other acidic polysac-
charides (60), and because pectin and other acidic
polysaccharides are not likely to be found together. For
a review of methods for determination of pectin, see
references (61, 62).

Because of

the dominance of D-galacturonic
acid in its structure, pectins are often determined
using the carbazole or m-hydroxydiphenyl methods
(Sect. 10.4.2.2). Isolation of crude pectin usually pre-
cedes analysis.

10.4.2.3.3 Degree of Esteriﬁcation The degree of
esteriﬁcation (DE) is a most important parameter in
both natural products and added pectin. DE may be
measured directly by titration before and after saponi-
ﬁcation. First, the isolated pectin (Sect. 10.4.2.2) is
washed with acidiﬁed alcohol to convert carboxy-
late groups into free carboxylic acid groups and then
washed free of excess acid. Then, a dispersion of the
pectinic acid in water is titrated with dilute base, such
as standardized sodium hydroxide solution, to deter-
mine the percentage of nonesteriﬁed carboxyl ester
groups. Excess base is added to saponify the methyl
ester groups. Back-titration with standardized acid to
determine excess base following saponiﬁcation gives
the DE. Also, DE can be determined by measuring
methanol released by saponiﬁcation via GC (63) and
by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (see Chap. 25)
(64, 65).

10.5 DIETARY FIBER

10.5.1 Introduction
Although there is an ongoing discussion about what
constitutes dietary ﬁber within both domestic and
international organizations (66), dietary ﬁber is essen-
tially the sum of the nondigestible components of a
foodstuff or food product. Most, but not all, dietary
ﬁber is plant cell-wall material (cellulose, hemicel-
luloses,
lignin) and thus is composed primarily of

166

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

polysaccharide molecules (see Sect. 10.5.1.2 for deﬁni-
tions of dietary ﬁber). Because only the amylose and
amylopectin molecules in cooked starch are digestible
(Sect. 10.4.1.2), all other polysaccharides are also com-
ponents of dietary ﬁber. Some are components of
insoluble ﬁber; some make up soluble ﬁber. Insolu-
ble dietary ﬁber components are cellulose, microcrys-
talline cellulose added as a food ingredient, lignin,
hemicelluloses entrapped in a lignocellulosic matrix,
and resistant starch (Sect. 10.4.1.1.2). Other polysac-
charides,
including many, but not all, hemicellu-
loses not entrapped in a lignocellulosic matrix, much
of the native pectin, and the majority of hydrocol-
loids/food gums (Sect. 10.4.2), are classiﬁed as soluble
dietary ﬁber. Often, their determination is important
in terms of making food label claims and is described
in Sect. 10.4.2. Determination of the β-glucan content
of products made with oat or barley ﬂours is an exam-
ple. (Nondigestible protein is not considered to be a
signiﬁcant contributor to dietary ﬁber.)

Since the scheme presented in Fig. 10-11 is
designed to separate nonstarch, water-soluble
polysaccharides from other components for quanti-
tative and/or qualitative analysis, the pellet from the
centrifugation step (e) is insoluble ﬁber, and those
components precipitated from the supernatant with
alcohol [step (f)] constitute soluble ﬁber; but speciﬁc
ﬁber determination methods have been established
and are presented in Sect. 10.5.4.3.

Measurement of insoluble ﬁber is important not
only in its own right, but also for calculating the
caloric content of a food. According to nutrition label-
ing regulations, one method allowed to calculate
calories involves subtracting the amount of insoluble
dietary ﬁber from the value for total carbohydrate,
before calculating the calories based on protein, fat,
and carbohydrate content (approximately 4, 9, and
4 Calories per gram, respectively) (Chap. 3). This
method ignores the fact that soluble ﬁber, like insol-
uble ﬁber, is also essentially noncaloric. [Fiber compo-
nents can contribute calories via absorption of prod-
ucts of fermentation (mostly short-chain fatty acids)
from the colon].

10.5.1.1 ImportanceofDietaryFiber
In 1962, it was postulated that the prevalence of heart
disease and certain cancers in Western societies was
related to inadequate consumption of dietary ﬁber
(67). Much research has been done since then to test
the ﬁber hypothesis. While the research has not always
produced consistent results, it is clear that adequate
consumption of dietary ﬁber is important for optimum
health.

Adequate consumption of dietary ﬁber from a
variety of foods will help protect against colon cancer
and also help to keep blood lipids within the normal
range, thereby reducing the risk of obesity, hyper-
tension, and cardiovascular disease in general. Cer-
tain types of ﬁber can slow D-glucose absorption and
reduce insulin secretion, which is of great impor-
tance for diabetics and probably contributes to the
well-being of nondiabetics as well. Fiber helps pre-
vent constipation and diverticular disease. However,
dietary ﬁber is not a magic potion that will correct or
prevent all diseases. Rather, dietary ﬁber is an essen-
tial component of a well-balanced diet that will help
minimize some common health problems. References
(68–73) provide an extensive compilation of articles
related to the physiological action of dietary ﬁber.

The Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) value for
dietary ﬁber to promote optimal health has been set
at 25 g per 2000 kcal per day. However, dietary ﬁber
includes a variety of materials that in turn produce a
variety of physiological actions (68–73). For example,
the pentosan fraction of dietary ﬁber seems to be most
beneﬁcial in preventing colon cancer and reducing car-
diovascular disease. Pectin and the hydrocolloids are
most beneﬁcial in slowing glucose absorption and in
lowering insulin secretion. A mixture of hemicellu-
lose and cellulose will help prevent diverticulosis and
constipation.

Recognition of the importance of dietary ﬁber and
of the fact that certain physiologic effects can be related
to speciﬁc ﬁber components has led to the emer-
gence of a number of methodologies for determining
dietary ﬁber.

10.5.1.2 Deﬁnition
Because labeling of food products for dietary ﬁber con-
tent is required, an ofﬁcial analytical method(s) for
its determination is required. The ﬁrst step in adopt-
ing a method must be agreement on what constitutes
dietary ﬁber. Then, there must be a method that mea-
sures what is included in the deﬁnition. A deﬁnition
and a method related to it are also needed: (a) to deter-
mine the dietary ﬁber content of any new ingredient
such as new resistant or slowly digesting starch prod-
ucts, and (b) to ensure that scientiﬁc studies of the
physiological effects of dietary ﬁber are based on the
same measure of dietary ﬁber content.

Following extensive international consultation,
the American Association of Cereal Chemists (now
AACC International) adopted the following deﬁni-
tion in 2001 (74–78). “Dietary ﬁber is the edible parts
of plants or analogous carbohydrates that are resis-
tant to digestion and absorption in the human small

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

167

intestine with complete or partial fermentation in the
large intestine. Dietary ﬁber includes polysaccharides,
oligosaccharides,
lignin, and associated plant sub-
stances. Dietary ﬁber promotes beneﬁcial physiologi-
cal effects, such as laxation, and/or blood cholesterol
attenuation, and/or blood glucose attenuation.”

intestine;

No polysaccharide other than starch is digested
in the human small
so all polysaccha-
rides other than nonresistant starch are included in
this deﬁnition of ﬁber. Of the oligosaccharides, only
sucrose, lactose, and those derived from starch (mal-
tooligosaccharides/maltodextrins) are digested. The
term analogous carbohydrates is deﬁned as those
carbohydrate-based food ingredients that are nondi-
gestible and nonabsorbable, but are not natural plant
components. Wax (suberin and cutin) is included
within associated substances. The deﬁnition also
includes some of the health beneﬁts known to be
associated with ingestion of dietary ﬁber.

Since adoption of the deﬁnition, modiﬁed ver-
sions have been adopted by both governmental and
nongovernmental organizations around the world.
However, there is yet no consensus of national and
international organizations as to a deﬁnition (66). One
reason that formulating a deﬁnition acceptable to all
is so difﬁcult is that dietary ﬁber materials from dif-
ferent sources are often different mixtures of nondi-
gestible and nonabsorbable carbohydrates and other
substances with different effects on human physiol-
ogy. However, there is general agreement that dietary
ﬁber consists of oligo- and polysaccharides, lignin, and
other substances not digested by digestive enzymes in
the human stomach or small intestine.

10.5.2 Major Components of Dietary Fiber
The major components of natural dietary ﬁber are cel-
lulose, hemicelluloses, lignin, and other nonstarch
plant polysaccharides such as pectin. In a food prod-
uct, added hydrocolloids/food gums, resistant starch,
and certain oligosaccharides such as those derived
from inulin are included because they are also nondi-
gestible and provide certain of the physiological bene-
ﬁts of dietary ﬁber. An example is polydextrose, which
is often, but not always, used in product formula-
tions speciﬁcally because it is considered to be soluble
dietary ﬁber.

10.5.2.1 Cell-WallPolysaccharidesofLand
Plants
10.5.2.1.1 Cellulose Cellulose is a linear polymer
of β-D-glucopyranosyl units (1). Some molecules
may contain 10,000 or more glucosyl units. Hydro-
gen bonding between parallel polymers
forms

strong microﬁbrils. Cellulose microﬁbrils provide
the strength and rigidity required in primary and
secondary plant cell walls.

10.5.2.1.2 Hemicelluloses Hemicelluloses are a het-
erogeneous group of polysaccharides, the only sim-
ilarity between them being their association with
cellulose in plant cell walls (1). Units of D-xylose,
D-mannose, and D-galactose frequently form the
main-chain structures of hemicelluloses; units of L-
arabinose, D-galactose, and uronic acids are often
present as branch units or in side chains. Hemicellu-
loses may be soluble or insoluble in water. Molecular
sizes and degrees of branching vary widely.

10.5.2.1.3 Pectins What
food scientists generally
call pectin (Sect. 10.4.2.3) is (like the hemicelluloses)
a family of polysaccharides, although in this case
there is structural similarity. The main feature of
all commercial pectins is a linear chain of 1,4-linked
α-D-galactopyranosyluronic acid units. Interspersed
segments of neutral sugar units may be branched,
sometimes with other polysaccharides. The carboxylic
acid groups of the D-galacturonic acid units are often
in the methyl ester form. When present primarily
in a calcium and/or magnesium salt form, they are
generally water insoluble and extractable only with
dilute solutions of acid, chelators such as EDTA, or
ammonium oxalate. These molecules are present in the
middle lamella of plant tissues.

10.5.2.2 Hydrocolloids/FoodGumsasDietary
Fiber
As mentioned in Sect. 10.5.1, all polysaccharides other
than those in cooked starch are nondigestible and,
therefore, classiﬁed as dietary ﬁber. Therefore, those
polysaccharides classiﬁed as food gums or hydrocol-
loids (Sect. 10.4.2) fall within the deﬁnition of dietary
ﬁber. Those obtained from marine algae (alginates
and carrageenans) and certain of those from higher
land plants (cellulose, the hemicelluloses, and the pec-
tic polysaccharides) are cell-wall or middle lamella
structural components. Others are either nonstruc-
tural plant polysaccharides (guar gum,
locust bean
gum, and inulin) or bacterial polysaccharides (xan-
than and gellan), but neither do we humans have small
intestinal enzymes that can digest them.

10.5.2.3 ResistantStarch
See Sect. 10.4.1.1.2. Resistant starch content in a food
or food ingredient can be determined using AOAC
Method 2002.02 (AACC Method 32-40.01).

168

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

10.5.2.4 Lignin
Lignin is a noncarbohydrate,
three-dimensional,
water-insoluble polymer and a major component of
the cell walls of higher land plants (79). Lignin may
be covalently linked to hemicellulose.

10.5.3 General Considerations
Fiber components or subfractions of them are usu-
ally not distinct entities, rather their compositions
are methodology dependent. Although considerable
progress has been made in relating ﬁber composi-
tion to physiological effects, much remains to be
learned, and improving the nutritional value of foods
by adding ﬁber or modifying resistant starch content
remains a challenge for the food scientist.

10.5.4 Methods
10.5.4.1 Overview
Dietary ﬁber is often determined gravimetrically. In
such a procedure, digestible carbohydrates,
lipids,
and proteins are selectively solubilized by chemicals
or removed by enzyme-catalyzed hydrolysis. Then,
nonsolubilized and/or nondigested materials are col-
lected by ﬁltration, and the ﬁber residue is recovered,
dried, and weighed.

are

Alpha-amylase,

(amyloglucosidase)

debranching enzymes,

The food component that may be most prob-
In any method
lematic in ﬁber analysis is starch.
is essential
for determination of dietary ﬁber,
it
that all digestible starch be removed,
for incom-
plete removal of digestible starch increases the residue
weight and inﬂates the estimate of ﬁber. [Resistant
starch (Sect. 10.4.1.1.2) is a component of dietary ﬁber.]
and
glucoamylase
enzymes
used in starch analysis (76). α-Amylase catalyzes
hydrolysis of unbranched segments of 1,4-linked
α-D-glucopyranosyl units forming primarily mal-
tooligosaccharides composed of 3–6 units. Debranch-
ing enzymes (both pullulanase and isoamylase are
used) catalyze hydrolysis of the 1,6 linkages that con-
stitute the branch points and thereby produce short
linear molecules. Glucoamylase (amyloglucosidase)
starts at the nonreducing ends of starch chains and
releases D-glucose, one unit at a time;
it will cat-
alyze hydrolysis of both 1, 4 and 1, 6 α-D-glucosyl
linkages.
◦

All ﬁber methods include a heating step (95–100

C
for 35 min) to gelatinize starch granules and make
them susceptible to hydrolysis. Resistant starch
molecules (Sect. 10.4.1.1.2) remain unhydrolyzed and,
therefore, are usually measured as dietary ﬁber, but
not all nondigestible products made from starch

may be determined as dietary ﬁber by the approved
methods.

Nondigestible oligosaccharides such as those
derived from inulin and certain specially prepared
maltodextrins also are problematic in an analytical
sense since they are in the soluble portion that is not
precipitated with ethanol.

It is essential either that all digestible materials
be removed from the sample so that only nondi-
gestible polysaccharides remain or that the nondi-
gestible residue be corrected for remaining digestible
contaminants. Lipids are removed easily from the
sample with organic solvents (Sect. 10.5.4.2) and gen-
erally do not pose analytical problems for the ﬁber
analyst. Protein and minerals that are not removed
from the sample during the solubilization steps should
be corrected for by Kjeldahl nitrogen analysis (Chap. 9)
and by ashing (Chap. 7) portions of the ﬁber residue.
is
required, because dietary ﬁber is a complex heteroge-
neous material containing several substances with dif-
ferent solubilities and other properties, and because of
its physiological importance, methods for ﬁber deter-
mination continue to be researched and reﬁned (76,77).

Because labeling of dietary ﬁber content

10.5.4.2 SamplePreparation
Measures of ﬁber are most consistent when the sam-
ples are low in fat (less than 10% lipid), dry, and ﬁnely
ground. If necessary, the sample is ground to pass
through a 0.3–0.5-mm mesh screen. If the sample con-
tains more than 10% lipid, the lipid is removed by
extraction with 25 parts (vol/wt) of petroleum ether
or hexane in an ultrasonic water bath. The mixture
is then centrifuged and the organic solvent decanted.
This extraction is repeated. The sample is air dried
to remove the organic solvent. It may then be dried
overnight in a vacuum oven at 70
C if a measure of
lipid and moisture content is required. Loss of weight
due to fat and moisture removal is recorded, and
the necessary correction is made in the calculation of
the percentage dietary ﬁber value determined in the
analysis.

◦

If samples contain large amounts of soluble sug-
ars (mono-, di-, and trisaccharides), they should be
extracted three times with 80% aqueous ethanol in an
ultrasonic water bath at room temperature for 15 min.
The supernatant liquid is discarded and the residue is
dried at 40

C.

◦

Nonsolid samples with less than 10% ﬁber are best
analyzed after freeze drying. Nonsolid samples with
greater than 10% ﬁber can be analyzed without drying
if the sample is homogeneous and low in fat and if par-
ticle size is sufﬁciently small to allow efﬁcient removal
of digestible carbohydrate and protein.

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

169

10.5.4.3 Methods
10.5.4.3.1 Overview A variety of methods have been
developed and used at different times for different
products. AOAC International Ofﬁcial Methods of Anal-
ysis in reference (5) and AACC International Approved
Methods in reference (80) are listed in Table 10-4. It
is obvious from the list that methods are generally
speciﬁc for the type of ﬁber or the ﬁber component
desired to be measured. For example, when inulin (a
fructan) or its breakdown products (fructooligosaccha-
rides, FOS) are added to food products, not all of the
inulin and perhaps none of the FOS are precipitated
by addition of four volumes of alcohol (because of
their low molecular weights) and measured as soluble
dietary ﬁber, although both inulin and FOS undergo
fermentation in the colon and are, therefore, compo-
nents of dietary ﬁber. As a result special methods have

been designed for them. The same is true of poly-
dextrose and resistant maltodextrins. In other cases,
determination of a speciﬁc component of dietary ﬁber,
such as β-glucan and resistant starch, may be desired.
The most widely used general method for total, solu-
ble, and insoluble dietary ﬁber (AOAC Method 991.43,
AACC Method 32-07.01) is outlined below. Table 10-5
gives the ﬁber content of select foods analyzed by this
method.

10.5.4.3.2 AOAC Method 991.43 (AACC Method 32-
07.01) This method determines soluble,
insoluble,
and total dietary ﬁber in cereal products, fruits and
vegetables, processed foods, and processed food
ingredients.

1. Principle. Starch and protein are removed from
a sample by treating the sample sequentially with a
thermostable α-amylase, a protease, and glucoamylase

10-4
table

Ofﬁcial Methods of Analysis for Dietary Fiber

AOAC Method
No.(5)

AACCMethod

No.(80)

DescriptionofMethodandMeasuredSubstance

994.13

993.21

985.29

991.42

993.19
991.43

2002.02

993.03

997.08

2000.11

2001.03

2001.02

32-25.01

32-05.01

32-06.01

32-07.01

32-40.01

32-21.01

32-32.01

32-31.01

32-28.01

32-22.01

32-23.01

32-41.01

32-33.01

Total dietary ﬁber determined as neutral sugar and uronic acid

monomer units and Klason lignin by a gas
chromatographic–spectrophotometric–gravimetric method

Nonenzymic-gravimetric method for total dietary ﬁber

applicable to determination of >10% TDF in foods and food
products with <2% starch

Enzymic-gravimetric method for total dietary ﬁber in cereal

grains and cereal grain-based products

A rapid gravimetric method for total dietary ﬁber
Enzymic-gravimetric method for insoluble dietary ﬁber in

vegetables, fruits, and cereal grains

Enzymic-gravimetric method for soluble dietary ﬁber
Enzymic-gravimetric method for total, soluble, and insoluble

dietary ﬁber in grain and cereal products, processed foods,
fruits, and vegetables

Enzymic method for RS2 and RS3 in products and plant

materials

Enzymic-gravimetric method for insoluble and soluble dietary

ﬁber in oats and oat products

Enzymic-spectrophotometric method for total fructan (inulin

and fructooligosaccharides) in foods

Enzymic-spectrophotometric method for fructan (inulin) in

foods (not applicable to fructooligosaccharides)

Anion-exchange chromatographic method for fructan in foods
and food products applicable to the determination of added
inulin in processed foods

foods

Anion-exchange chromatographic method for polydextrose in
Enzymic method for β-glucan in oat fractions and unsweetened
Rapid enzymic procedure for β-glucan content of barley and

oat cereals

oats

Enzymic-gravimetric and liquid chromatographic method for

dietary ﬁber containing added resistant maltodextrin

Anion-exchange chromatographic method for

trans-galactooligosaccharides (TGOS) applicable to added
TGOS in selected food products

170

10-5
table

Food

Total, Soluble, and Insoluble Dietary Fiber
in Foods as Determined by AOAC Method
991.43a

Solubleb

Insolubleb

Totalb

Barley
High-ﬁber cereal
Oat bran
Soy bran
Apricots
Prunes
Raisins
Carrots
Green beans
Parsley

5.02
2.78
7.17
6.90
0.53
5.07
0.73
1.10
1.02
0.64

7.05
30.52
9.73
60.53
0.59
4.17
2.37
2.81
2.01
2.37

12.14
33.30
16.90
67.56
1.12
9.37
3.03
3.92
3.03
3.01

aAdapted from Ofﬁcial Methods of Analysis, 18th edn. Copyright
2005 by AOAC International.
bGrams of ﬁber per 100 g of food on a fresh weight basis.

(amyloglucosidase). The insoluble residue is recov-
ered and washed (insoluble dietary ﬁber). Ethanol
is added to the soluble portion to precipitate solu-
ble polysaccharides (soluble dietary ﬁber). To obtain
total dietary ﬁber (TDF), the alcohol is added after
digestion with the glucoamylase, and the soluble and
insoluble dietary ﬁber fractions are collected together,
dried, weighed, and ashed.

2. Outline of procedure. A ﬂow diagram outlin-
ing the general procedure for the method is given in
Fig. 10-12. Letters in the parentheses refer to the same
letters in Fig. 10-12. If necessary, lipids are removed by
extraction (Sect. 10.5.4.2).

(a) To samples devoid of

signiﬁcant

lipid
solvent-soluble substances is added 2-(N-
morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid-tris(hydroxy-
methyl)aminomethane
buffer
(0.05 M each, pH 8.2) and a thermostable
α-amylase. The mixture is heated 35 min at
95–100
C to gelatinize any starch so that the
α-amylase can break it down.

(MES-TRIS)

◦

(b) After cooling to 60

◦

C, a protease is added, and
C for 35 min to

◦

the mixture is incubated at 60
break down the protein.

◦

(d) To determine TDF,

(c) The pH is adjusted to 4.1–4.8, glucoamylase is
added, and the mixture is incubated at 60
C for
30 min to complete the digestion of any starch.
four volumes of 95%
ethanol are added. The residue plus precip-
itate is collected by ﬁltration, washed with
78% ethanol, 95% ethanol, and acetone in that
order, dried, and weighed (see below). Protein
and ash are determined on duplicate samples
and the weight is corrected for them. Alterna-

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

tively, TDF can be calculated as the sum of the
insoluble and soluble dietary ﬁber determined
in the remainder of the procedure.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Add 4 volumes of ethanol.

Collect residue + precipitate by filtration,
wash with 78% ethanol, 95% ethanol and
acetone, dry, and weigh.

Subtract weights of protein and ash
determined on duplicate samples.

Total dietary fiber

(e) The mixture obtained after step (c) is ﬁltered
through a crucible containing fritted glass disk
and preashed Celite (a siliceous ﬁlter aid).

(f) The residue is washed with water,

95%
ethanol, and acetone in that order, dried, and
weighed.

(g) The dried residue is analyzed for protein using
the Kjeldahl method (Chap. 9). A duplicate
residue is analyzed for ash (Chap. 7). The
weights of protein and ash are subtracted from
the residue weight obtained in step (f) to deter-
mine insoluble dietary ﬁber.

◦

(h) To determine soluble dietary ﬁber, to the ﬁl-
trate and washings from steps (e) and (f) at
60
C are added four volumes of 95% ethanol
(to give an ethanol concentration of 76%). The
precipitate is collected by ﬁltration through
a crucible containing a fritted glass disk and
preashed Celite. The residue is washed with
78% ethanol, 95% ethanol, and acetone. The
crucible is dried at 103

C and weighed.

◦

(i) Protein and ash are determined as in step (f)
and the weights of protein and ash are sub-
tracted from the residue weight obtained in
step (h) to determine soluble dietary ﬁber.
Total dietary ﬁber may be determined as
described in (d) or obtained by adding the val-
ues for insoluble (g) and soluble (i) dietary
ﬁber.

Duplicate reagent blanks must be run through
the entire procedure for each type of ﬁber determi-
nation. Table 10-6 shows a sample and blank sheet

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

171

Sample

Digest with α-amylase (a) 

Digest with protease (b) 

Digest with glucoamylase (c) 

(d) See text 

Filter and wash with water (e) 

Residue 

(Insoluble fiber)

Filtrate and washings 

(Soluble fiber)

Wash with water, 95% ethanol, 
and acetone, oven dry, and 
weigh (f) 

Subtract weights of 
protein and ash 
determined on 
duplicate samples (g) 

Insoluble fiber 

Add 4 volumes of 
ethanol and filter (h)

Solubles

Precipitate 

(Soluble fiber) 

Wash with 78% ethanol, 95% 
ethanol, and acetone, oven dry, 
and weigh (h)

Subtract weights of protein and 
ash determined on duplicate 
samples (i) 

Soluble fiber 

10-12
f i g u r e

Flow diagram of AOAC Method 991.43 (AACC International Method 32-07.01) for determining soluble, insoluble,
and total dietary ﬁber.

used to calculate ﬁber percentages. Using the equa-
tions shown, percent dietary ﬁber is expressed on a
dry weight basis if the sample weights are for dried
samples. If it is believed that resistant starch is present,
it can be determined separately using AOAC Method
2002.02 (AACC Method 32-40.01).

10.6 PHYSICAL METHODS

10.6.1 Microscopy
Microscopy can be a valuable tool in food analy-
sis. Various kinds of microscopy [light, ﬂuorescence,
confocal scanning laser (CSLM), Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR), scanning electron (SEM), and trans-
mission electron (TEM) microscopies] have been used
to study the organization of food products and the
stability of emulsions and foams and to identify extra-
neous matter and its amount (Chap. 19). Microscopy
is particularly useful in examinations of starchy foods.

Granule size, shape, and form,
the birefringence
endpoint temperature determined using a polarizing
microscope with a hot stage, and,
in some cases,
iodine-staining characteristics can be used to iden-
tify the starch source (81). In cooked starch prod-
ucts, the extent of retrogradation (82) and the effects
of storage on microstructure have been evaluated by
iodine staining and light microscopy (83–89). The
degree that starch has been damaged mechanically
during dry milling (90), the extent of digestion by
enzymes, and whether the starch-based product has
been overcooked, undercooked, or correctly cooked
also can be determined microscopically. Quantitative
microscopy has been employed for analysis of the
nonstarch polysaccharides of cereal grains (91).

10.6.2 Mass and NIR Transmittance
Spectrometry
Mass and NIR transmittance spectrometry have been
used to determine sugar content (92). NIR spectrom-
etry is described in Chap. 23. Mass spectrometry is
mentioned in Sect. 10.3.4.4.

172

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

10-6
table

Dietary Fiber Data Sheeta

Sample

Blank

Insoluble

Fiber

m1 m2

Soluble
Fiber

Insoluble

Fiber

Soluble
Fiber

R1 R2 R1 R2

R1 R2 R1 R2

Sample wt (mg)
Crucible + Celite wt (mg)
Crucible + Celite + residue wt (mg)
Residue wt (mg)
Protein (mg) P
Crucible + Celite + ash wt (mg)
Ash wt (mg) A
Blank wt (mg) Bb
Fiber (%)c

aAdapted with permission from J AOAC Int (1988), 71:1019. Copyright 1988 by AOAC International.
bBlank(mg) = R1 + R2

2
R1+R2

2

− P− A
− P− A− B
m1+m2

2

× 100

cFiber(%) =

10.6.3 Speciﬁc Gravity
Speciﬁc gravity is deﬁned as the ratio of the den-
sity of a substance to the density of a reference sub-
stance (usually water), both at a speciﬁed temperature.
The concentration of a carbohydrate solution can be
determined by measuring the speciﬁc gravity of the
solution, then referring to appropriate speciﬁc gravity
tables (11).

Measurement of speciﬁc gravity as a means of
determining sugar concentration is accurate only for
pure sucrose or other solutions of a single pure sub-
stance (AOAC Method 932.14), but it can be, and
is, used for obtaining approximate values for liquid
products (Chap. 6). Two basic means of determining
speciﬁc gravity are used. By far the most common is
use of a hydrometer calibrated either in
Brix, which
corresponds to sucrose concentrations by weight, or
in Baumé Modulus (Bé). The values obtained are con-
verted into concentrations by use of tables constructed
for the substance in the pure solution, e.g., sucrose or
glucose syrups.

◦

10.6.4 Refractive Index
When electromagnetic radiation passes from one
medium to another, it changes direction (i.e., is bent
or refracted). The ratio of the sine of the angle of inci-
dence to the sine of the angle of refraction is termed
the refractive index (RI). The RI varies with the nature
of the compound, the temperature, the wavelength of
light, and the concentration of the compound. By hold-
ing the ﬁrst three variables constant, the concentration
of the compound can be determined by measuring the
RI. Thus, measurement of refractive index is another

way to determine total solids in solution (Chap. 6).
Like determination of speciﬁc gravity, use of RI to
determine concentrations is accurate only for pure
sucrose or other solutions of a single pure substance,
and also like the determination of speciﬁc gravity, it is
used for obtaining approximate sugar concentrations
in liquid products (11). In this case, the solution must
be clear. Refractometers that read directly in sucrose
units are available.

10.7 SUMMARY

For determination of low-molecular-weight carbohy-
drates, older colorimetric methods for total carbohy-
drate, various reducing sugar methods, and physical
measurements have largely been replaced by chro-
matographic methods. The older chemical methods
suffer from the fact that they are not stoichiometric
and, therefore, require standard curves. This makes
them particularly problematic when a mixture of
sugars is being determined. Physical measurements
are not speciﬁc for carbohydrates. Chromatographic
methods (HPLC and GC) separate mixtures into the
component sugars, identify each component by reten-
tion time, and provide a measurement of the mass of
each component. Enzymic methods are speciﬁc and
sensitive, but seldom, except in the case of starch,
is determination of only a single component desired.
HPLC is widely used for identiﬁcation and measure-
ment of mono- and oligosaccharides.

Polysaccharides are important components of
many food products. Yet there is no universal proce-
dure for their analysis. Generally, isolation must pre-
cede measurement. Isolation introduces errors because

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

173

no extraction or separation technique is stochiometric.
Identiﬁcation and measurement are done by hydroly-
sis to constituent monosaccharides and their determi-
nation. An exception is starch, which can be digested
to glucose using speciﬁc enzymes (amylases),
fol-
lowed by measurement of the glucose released.

Insoluble dietary ﬁber, soluble dietary ﬁber, and
total dietary ﬁber are each composed primarily of
nonstarch polysaccharides. The method for the deter-
mination of starch is based on its complete conversion
to, and determination of, D-glucose. Methods for the
determination of total dietary ﬁber and its components
rely on removal of the digestible starch in the same
way and often on removal of digestible protein with
a protease, leaving nondigestible components.

10.8 STUDY QUESTIONS

1. Give three reasons why carbohydrate analysis is impor-

tant.

2. “Proximate composition” refers to analysis for mois-
ture, ash, fat, protein, and carbohydrate. Identify which
of these components of “proximate composition” are
actually required on a nutrition label. Also, explain why
it is important to measure the nonrequired components
quantitatively if one is developing a nutrition label.

3. Distinguish chemically between monosaccharides,
oligosaccharides, and polysaccharides, and explain
how solubility characteristics can be used in an extrac-
tion procedure to separate monosaccharides and
oligosaccharides from polysaccharides.

4. Discuss why mono- and oligosaccharides are extracted
with 80% ethanol rather than with water. What is the
principle involved?

5. Deﬁne reducing sugar. Classify each of the following
as a reducing or nonreducing carbohydrate: D-glucose,
D-fructose (Conditions must be described. Why?), sor-
bitol, sucrose, maltose, rafﬁnose, maltotriose, cellulose,
amylopectin, κ-carrageenan.

6. Brieﬂy describe a method that could be used for each of

the following:

(a) To prevent hydrolysis of sucrose when sugars are

extracted from fruits via a hot alcohol extraction

(b) To remove proteins from solution for an enzymic

analysis

(c) To measure total carbohydrate
(d) To measure total reducing sugars
(e) To measure the sucrose concentration in a pure

sucrose solution by a physical method

(f) To measure glucose enzymically
(g) To measure simultaneously the concentrations of

individual free sugars

7. What are the principles behind total carbohydrate
determination using the phenol-sulfuric acid method?
Give an example of another assay procedure based on
the same principle.

8. What is the principle behind determination of total
reducing sugars using the Somogyi–Nelson and similar
methods?

9. The Munson–Walker, Lane–Eynon, and Somogyi–
Nelson methods can be used to measure reducing
sugars. Explain the similarities and differences among
these methods with regard to the principles involved
and the procedures used.

10. Describe the principle behind AE-HPLC of carbohy-

drates.

11. Describe the general procedure for preparation of sug-
ars for GC. What is required for this method to be
successful?

12. What difference is there between the preparation of
an extract of reducing sugars for GC and the prepara-
tion of polysaccharide hydrolyzates containing uronic
acids for GC? What two differences are there in the ﬁnal
derivatives?

13. Why has HPLC largely replaced GC for analysis of

carbohydrates?

14. Compare and contrast RI and PAD detectors.
15. What is the advantage of an enzymic method? What is

the limitation (potential problem)?

16. Describe the principles behind the enzymic determina-
tion of starch. What are the advantages of this method?
What are potential problems?

17. Describe the principle behind each step in Fig. 10-11.

What is the reason for each step?

18. Describe the principles behind separation and analysis

of water-soluble gums and starch.

19. Describe two methods for determination of pectin.
20. Describe the principles behind and the limitations of
determining sugar (sucrose) concentrations by (a) spe-
ciﬁc gravity determination and (b) RI measurement.

21. Deﬁne dietary ﬁber.
22. List the major constituents of dietary ﬁber.
23. Explain how measurement of dietary ﬁber relates to

calculating the caloric content of a food product.

24. Explain the purpose(s) of each of the steps in the AOAC
Method 994.13 for total dietary ﬁber listed below as
applied to determination of the dietary ﬁber content of
a high-ﬁber snack food.
(a) Heating sample and treating with α-amylase
(b) Treating sample with glucoamylase
(c) Treating sample with protease
(d) Adding four volumes of 95% ethanol to sample after

treatment with glucoamylase and protease

(e) After drying and weighing the ﬁltered and washed
residue, heating one duplicate ﬁnal product to
525
C in a mufﬂe furnace and analyzing the other
duplicate sample for protein.

◦

25. What is the physiological deﬁnition and the chemical
nature of resistant starch? What types of foods have
relatively high levels of resistant starch?

10.9 PRACTICE PROBLEMS

1. The following data were obtained when an extruded
breakfast cereal was analyzed for total ﬁber by AOAC
Method 991.43 (AACC Method 32-07).

174

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

Sample wt (mg)
Residue wt (mg)
Protein wt (mg)
Ash wt (mg)
Blank wt (mg)
Resistant starch (mg)

1002.8
151.9
13.1
21.1
6.1
35.9

What is percent total ﬁber (a) without and (b) with cor-
rection for resistant starch, determined to the appropriate
number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures?

2. The following tabular data were obtained when a high-
ﬁber cookie was analyzed for ﬁber content by AOAC
Method 991.43 (AACC Method 32-07).

Sample

Insoluble

Soluble

1002.1

1005.3

31, 637.2 32, 173.9 32, 377.5 33, 216.4

31, 723.5 32, 271.2 32, 421.6 33, 255.3

6.5

3.9

32, 195.2

33, 231.0

Blank

Insoluble

Soluble

31, 563.6 32, 198.7 33, 019.6 31, 981.2

31, 578.2 32, 213.2 33, 033.4 33, 995.6

3.2

3.3

32, 206.8

31, 989.1

Sample wt (mg)
Crucible + Celite

wt (mg)

Crucible + Celite +

residue wt (mg)

Protein (mg)
Crucible + Celite +

ash wt (mg)

Crucible + Celite

wt (mg)

Crucible + Celite +

residue wt (mg)

Protein (mg)
Crucible + Celite +

ash wt (mg)

What is the (a) insoluble, (b) soluble, and (c) total ﬁber
content of the cookie determined to the appropriate num-
ber of signiﬁcant ﬁgures?

Answers
1. Number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures = 2 (6.1 mg)
× 100 = 11%

151.9 − 13.1 − 21.1 − 6.0
151.9 − 13.1 − 21.1 − 6.1 − 35.9

1002.8

(a)

(b)

1002.8

× 100 = 7.5%

2. (a) 6.1%, (b) 2.0%, (c) 8.1%

(Calculations are done a little differently than those at the
bottom of Table 10-6.)

a. Insoluble dietary ﬁber
Number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures = 2 (6.5 mg, 3.2 mg)
Blank residue = 31, 578.2 mg − 31, 563.6 mg = 14.6 mg
32, 231.2 mg − 32, 198.7 mg = 14.5 mg

Average = 14.6 mg

Blank ash = 32, 206.8 mg − 32, 198.7 mg = 8.1 mg

First sample residue:

= 31, 723.5 mg − 31, 637.2 mg = 86.3 mg
Ash = 32, 195.2 mg − 32, 173.9 mg = 21.3 mg
86.3 mg (residue weight)
− 14.6 mg (blank)
− 3.3 mg (protein, 6.5 − 3.2 [blank])
− 13.2 mg (ash, 21.3 − 8.1 [blank])
= 55.2 mg
(55.2 mg ÷ 1, 002.1[sample wt.]) × 100 = 5.5%
Second sample residue :
= 32, 271.2 mg − 32, 173.9 mg = 97.3 mg
97.3 − 14.5 − 3.3 − 13.2 = 66.3 mg

(66.3 mg ÷ 1005.3 mg [sample wt.]) × 100 = 6.6%
Average of 5.5% and 6.6% = 6.1%

b. Soluble dietary ﬁber
Number of signiﬁcant ﬁgures = 2 (3.9 mg, 3.3 mg)
Blank residue = 33, 033.4 mg − 33, 019.6 mg = 13.8 mg
33, 995.6 mg − 31, 981.2 mg = 14.4 mg

Average = 14.1 mg

Blank ash = 31, 989.1 mg − 31, 981.2 mg = 7.9 mg

First sample residue:

= 32, 421.6 mg − 32, 377.5 mg = 44.1 mg
Ash = 33, 231.0 mg − 33, 216.4 mg = 14.6 mg
44.1 mg (residue weight)
− 14.1 mg (blank)
− 0.6 mg (protein, 3.9 − 3.3 [blank])
− 6.7 mg (ash, 14.6 − 7.9 [blank])
= 22.7 mg
(22.7 mg ÷ 1, 002.1[sample wt.]) × 100 = 2.3%
Second sample residue:
= 33, 255.3 mg − 33, 216.4 mg = 38.9 mg
38.9 − 14.1 − 0.6 − 6.7 = 17.5 mg
(17.5 mg ÷ 1005.3 [sample wt.]) × 100 = 1.7%
Average of 2.3% and 1.7% = 2.0%

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

175

c. Total dietary ﬁber (TDF)

TDF = 6.1% (insolubleﬁber)

+ 2.0% (solubleﬁber) = 8.1%

10.10 REFERENCES

1. BeMiller JN (2007) Carbohydrate chemistry for food

scientists, 2nd edn. AACC International, St. Paul, MN

2. BeMiller JN, Huber K (2008) Carbohydrates (Chapter 4).
In: Damodaran S, Parkin KL, Fennema OR (eds) Food
chemistry, 4th edn. Marcel Dekker, New York

3. Scherz H, Bonn G (1998) Analytical chemistry of carbo-

hydrates. Georg Thieme Verlag, Stuttgart

4. AOAC International (1995) Ofﬁcial methods of analysis,

16th edn. AOAC International, Gaithersburg, MD

5. AOAC International (2007) Ofﬁcial methods of analysis,
18th edn., 2005; Current through revision 2, 2007 (On-
line). AOAC International, Gaithersburg, MD

6. Anonymous (2009) Code of federal regulations, Title
21, Part 101.9 – Food nutrition labeling of food. US
Government Printing Ofﬁce, Washington, DC

7. Southgate DAT (1976) Determination of food carbohy-

drates. Applied Science Publishers, London

8. Chaplin MF, Kennedy JF (eds) (1994) Carbohydrate anal-

ysis. A practical approach, 2nd edn. IRL Press, Oxford

9. Dubois M, Gilles KA, Hamilton JK, Rebers PA, Smith F
(1956) Colorimetric method for determination of sugars
and related substances. Anal Chem 28:350

10. Sakano Y, Kobayashi T (1994) Enzymic preparation
of panose and isopanose from pullulan. Methods
Carbohydr Chem 10:249

11. Hodge JE, Hofreiter BT (1962) Determination of reduc-
ing sugars and carbohydrates. Methods Carbohydr
Chem 1:380

12. Nelson N (1944) A photometric adaptation of the Somo-
gyi method for the determination of glucose. J Biol Chem
153:376

13. Somogyi M (1952) Notes on sugar determination. J Biol

Chem 195:19

14. Wood TM (1994) Enzymic conversion of cellulose into

D-glucose. Methods Carbohydr Chem 10:219

15. Miller GL, Blum R, Glennon WEG, Burton AL (1960)
Measurement of carboxymethylcellulase activity. Anal
Biochem 1:127

16. Hicks KB (1988) High-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy of carbohydrates. Adv Carbohydr Chem Biochem
46:17

17. Ball GFM (1990) The application of HPLC to the determi-
nation of low molecular weight sugars and polyhydric
alcohols in foods: a review. Food Chem 35:117

18. Corradini C (1994) Recent advances in carbohydrate
analysis by high-performance anion-exchange chro-
matography coupled with pulsed amperometric detec-
tion (HPAEC-PAD). Ann Chim-Rome 84:385

19. El Rassi Z (ed) (1995) Carbohydrate analysis (Journal of
Chromatography Library, vol 58). Elsevier, Amsterdam
20. Cserháti T, Forgács E (1999) Chromatography in
food science and technology. Technomic Publishing,
Lancaster, PA

21. Cataldi TRI, Campa C, DeBenedetto GE (2000) Carbo-
hydrate analysis by high-performance anion-exchange
chromatography with pulsed amperometric detection:
the potential
is still growing. Fresen J Anal Chem
368:739

22. Jeon IJ (1995) Carbohydrates and sugars. Food Sci

Technol (NY) 65:87

23. Bugner E, Feinberg M (1992) Determination of mono-
and disaccharides in foods by interlaboratory study:
quantitation of bias components for liquid chromatog-
raphy. J AOAC Int 75:443

24. Huber CG, Bonn GK (1995) HPLC of carbohydrates
with cation- and anion-exchange silica and resin-based
stationary phases (Chapter 4 in reference 19)

25. Andersen R, Sørensen A (2000) Separation and deter-
mination of alditols and sugars by high-pH anion-
exchange chromatography with pulsed amperometric
detection. J Chromatogr A 897:195

26. Hanko VP, Rohrer JS (2000) Determination of carbo-
hydrates, sugar alcohols, and glycols in cell cultures
and fermentation broths using high-performance anion-
exchange chromatography with pulsed amperometric
detection. Anal Biochem 283:192

27. Ammeraal RN, Delgado GA, Tenbarge FL, Friedman RB
(1991) High-performance anion-exchange chromatog-
raphy with pulsed amperometric detection of linear
and branched glucose oligosaccharides. Carbohydr Res
215:179

28. Kazmaier T, Roth S, Zapp J, Harding M, Kuhn R
(1998) Quantitative analysis of maltooligosaccharides by
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry, capillary electrophore-
sis, and anion exchange chromatography. Fresen J Anal
Chem 361:473; 362:552

29. Churms SC (1995) High performance hydrophilic inter-
action chromatography of carbohydrates with polar sor-
bents (Chapter 3 in reference 19)

30. Verzele M, Simoens G, Van Damme F (1987) A critical
review of some liquid chromatography systems for the
separation of sugars. Chromatographia 23:292

31. El Rassi Z (1995) Reversed-phase and hydrophobic inter-
action chromatography of carbohydrates and glycocon-
jugates (Chapter 2 in reference 19)

32. Rajakyla E (1986) Use of reversed-phase chromatogra-

phy in carbohydrate analysis. J Chromatogr 353:1

33. Bruno AE, Krattiger B (1995) On-column refractive index
detection of carbohydrates separated by HPLC and CE
(Chapter 11 in reference 19)

34. Johnson DC, Lacourse WR (1995) Pulsed electrochemical
detection of carbohydrates at gold electrodes follow-
ing liquid chromatographic separations (Chapter 10 in
reference 19)

35. Hase S (1995) Pre- and post-column detection-oriented
derivatization techniques in HPLC of carbohydrates
(Chapter 15 in reference 19)

36. Biermann CJ, McGinnis GD (eds) (1989) Analysis of

carbohydrates by GLC and MS. CRC, Boca Raton, FL

37. Biermann CJ (1989) Introduction to analysis of carbo-
hydrates by gas-liquid chromatography (Chapter 1 in
reference 35)

38. Sloneker

JH (1972) Gas–liquid chromatography of

alditol acetates. Methods Carbohydr Chem 6:20

176

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

39. Fox A, Morgan SL, Gilbart J (1989) Preparation of
alditol acetates and their analysis by gas chromatogra-
phy (GC) and mass spectrometry (MS) (Chapter 5 in
reference 35)

40. Seymour FR (1993) Identiﬁcation and characterization
of saccharides by GLC separation and MS analysis of
their peracetylated aldononitrile (PAAN) and ketooxime
(PAKO) derivatives. Methods Carbohydr Chem 9:59

41. Harris P, Morrison A, Dacombe C (1995) A practical
approach to polysaccharide analysis (Chapter 18). In:
Stephen AM (ed) Food polysaccharides and their appli-
cations. Marcel Dekker, New York

42. BeMiller JN (ed) (1994) Methods in carbohydrate chem-

istry, vol 10, Enzymic methods. Wiley, New York

43. Bergmeyer HU (ed) (1984) Methods of enzymatic analy-
sis, vol 6, Metabolites 1: carbohydrates, 3rd edn. Verlag
Chemie, Weinheim, Germany

44. Setttineri CA, Burlingame AL (1995) Mass spectrome-
try of carbohydrates and glycoconjugates (Chapter 12 in
reference 19)

45. Vaccari G, Lodi G, Tamburini E, Bernardi T, Tosi S (2001)
Detection of oligosaccharides in sugar products using
planar chromatography. Food Chem 74:99

46. Klockow A, Paulus A, Figueiredo V, Amado R, Widmer
HM (1994) Determination of carbohydrates in fruit juices
by capillary electrophoresis and high-performance liq-
uid chromatography. J Chromatogr A 680:187

47. El Rassi Z, Nashabeth W (1995) High performance cap-
illary electrophoresis of carbohydrates and glycoconju-
gates (Chapter 8 in reference 19)

48. Asp NG, Bjoerck I (1992) Resistant starch. Trends Food

Sci Technol 3:111

49. McCleary BV, Gibson TS, Mugford DC (1997) Collabo-
rative evaluation of a simpliﬁed assay for total starch
in cereal products (AACC Method 76-13). Cereal Foods
World 42:476

50. Kainuma K (1994) Determination of the degree of gela-
tinization and retrogradation of starch. Methods Carbo-
hydr Chem 10:137

51. Baird JK (1993) Analysis of gums in foods (Chapter 23).
In: Whistler RL, BeMiller JN (eds) Industrial gums, 3rd
edn. Academic, San Diego, CA

52. BeMiller JN (1996) Gums/hydrocolloids: analytical
aspects (Chapter 6). In: Eliasson AC (ed) Carbohydrates
in food. Marcel Dekker, New York

53. National Academy of Sciences (1996) Food chem-
icals codex, 4th edn. Food and Nutrition Board,
National Research Council, National Academy Press,
Washington, DC

54. Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives
(JECFA) (1992) Compendium of food additive speciﬁ-
cations, vols 1 and 2. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper
52/1, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Rome, Italy

55. Bitter T, Muir HM (1962) A modiﬁed uronic acid car-

bazole reaction. Anal Biochem 4:330

56. Chandrasekaran EV, BeMiller JN (1980) Constituent
analysis of glycosaminoglycans. Methods Carbohydr
Chem 8:89

57. Blumenkrantz N, Absoe-Hansen G (1973) New method
for quantitative determination of uronic acids. Anal
Biochem 54:484

58. Kintner PK III, Van Buren JP (1982) Carbohydrate inter-
ference and its correction in pectin analysis using the
m-hydroxydiphenyl method. J Food Sci 47:756

59. Scott RW (1979) Colorimetric determination of hex-

uronic acids in plant materials. Anal Chem 51:936

60. Scott JE (1965) Fractionation by precipitation with qua-
ternary ammonium salts. Methods Carbohydr Chem
5:38

61. Baker RA (1997) Reassessment of some fruit and

vegetable pectin levels. J Food Sci 62:225

62. Walter RH (1991) Analytical and graphical methods for
pectin (Chapter 10). In: Walter RH (ed) The chemistry
and technology of pectin. Academic, San Diego, CA

63. Walter RH, Sherman RM, Lee CY (1983) A comparison
of methods for polyuronide methoxyl determination.
J Food Sci 48:1006

64. Grasdalen H, Bakøy OE, Larsen B (1988) Determina-
tion of the degree of esteriﬁcation and the distribution
of methylated and free carboxyl groups in pectins by
1H-N.M.R. spectroscopy. Carbohydr Res 184:183

65. Westerlund E, Åman P, Andersson RE, Andersson R
(1991) Investigation of the distribution of methyl ester
groups in pectin by high-ﬁeld 13C NMR. Carbohydr
Polym 14:179

66. Gordon DT (2007) Dietary ﬁber deﬁnitions at risk. Cereal

Foods World 52:112

67. Burkitt SP, Trowell MC (1975) Reﬁned carbohydrate

foods and disease. Academic, London

68. Leeds AR, Avenell A (eds) (1985) Dietary ﬁbre per-
spectives: reviews and bibliography 1. John Libby and
Company, London

69. Leeds AR, Burley V (eds) (1990) Dietary ﬁbre perspec-
John Libby and

tives: reviews and bibliography 2.
Company, London

70. Muir JC, Young OP, O’Dea K, Cameron-Smith S, Brown
IL, Collier GR (1993) Resistant starch the neglected
“dietary ﬁber”? Implications for health. Diet Fiber Bibli-
ogr Rev 1:33

71. Valnouny CV, Kritchevsky D (eds) (1986) Dietary ﬁber:

basic and clinical aspects. Plenum, New York

72. Salovaara H, Gates F, Tenkanen M (eds) (2007) Dietary
ﬁbre components and functions. Wageningen Academic,
Wageningen, The Netherlands

73. Gordon DT, Goda T (eds) (2008) Dietary ﬁber. AACC

International, St. Paul, MN

74. McCleary BV, Prosky L (eds) (2001) Advanced dietary

ﬁbre technology. Blackwell Science, London

75. Prosky L (2001) What is dietary ﬁbre? A new look at the

deﬁnition (Chapter 6 in reference 69)

76. Asp N-G (2001) Development of dietary ﬁbre methodol-

ogy (Chapter 7 in reference 69)

77. McCleary BV (2001) Measurement of dietary ﬁbre com-
ponents: the importance of enzyme purity, activity and
speciﬁcity (Chapter 8 in reference 69)

78. Anon (2001) The deﬁnition of dietary ﬁber. Cereal Foods

World 46:112

79. Lewis NG, Davin LB, Sarkanen S (1999) The nature
and function of lignins (Chapter 18). In: Pinto BM (ed)
Comprehensive natural products chemistry. Elsevier,
Oxford

80. AACC International (2010) Approved methods, 11th

edn (On-line). AACC International, St. Paul, MN

Chapter 10 • Carbohydrate Analysis

177

81. Fitt LE, Snyder EM (1984) Photomicrographs of starches
(Chapter 23). In: Whistler RL, BeMiller JN, Paschall EF
(eds) Starch: chemistry and technology, 2nd edn. Aca-
demic, Orlando, FL

82. Jacobson MR, Obanni M, BeMiller JN (1997) Retrograda-
tion of starches from different botanical sources. Cereal
Chem 74:511

83. Langton M, Hermansson A-M (1989) Microstructural
changes in wheat starch dispersions during heating and
cooling. Food Microstruct 8:29

84. Autio K (1990) Rheological and microstructural changes
of oat and barley starches during heating and cooling.
Food Struct 9:297

85. Svegmark K, Hermansson A-M (1991) Distribution of
amylose and amylopectin in potato starch pastes: effect
of heating and shearing. Food Struct 10:117

86. Autio K, Poutanen K, Suortti T, Pessa E (1992) Heat-
induced structural changes in acid-modiﬁed barley
starch dispersions. Food Struct 11:315

87. Svegmark K, Hermansson A-M (1992) Microstructure
and viscoelastic behavior of potato starch pastes. In:

Phillips GO, Wedlock DJ, Williams PA (eds) Gums and
stabilizers for the food industry, vol 6. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, p 93

88. Svegmark K, Hermansson A-M (1993) Microstructure
and rheological properties of composites of potato starch
granules and amylose; a comparison of observed and
predicted structures. Food Struct 12:181

89. Virtanen T, Autio K, Suortti T, Poutanen K (1993) Heat-
induced changes in native and acid-modiﬁed oat starch
pastes. J Cereal Sci 17:137

90. Sandstedt RM, Schroeder H (1960) A photomicrographic
study of mechanically damaged wheat starch. Food
Technol 14:257

91. Fulcher RG, Faubion JM, Ruan R, Miller SS (1994) Quan-
titative microscopy in carbohydrate analysis. Carbohydr
Polym 25:285

92. Mehrübeoglu M, Coté GL (1997) Determination of total
reducing sugars in potato samples using near-infrared
spectroscopy. Cereal Foods World 42:409 and references
therein

11

c h a p t e r

Vitamin Analysis

RonaldB.Pegg∗,W.O.Landen,Jr.,
andRonaldR.Eitenmiller
DepartmentofFoodScienceandTechnology,TheUniversityofGeorgia,
100CedarStreet,Athens,GA30602–7610,USA
rpegg@uga.edu
woland@uga.edu
eiten@uga.edu

11.1 Introduction 181

11.1.1 Deﬁnition and Importance 181
11.1.2 Importance of Analysis 181
11.1.3 Vitamin Units 181

11.2 Methods 182

11.2.1 Overview 182
11.2.2 Extraction Methods 184
11.2.3 Bioassay Methods 184

11.2.4 Microbiological Assays 185

11.2.4.1 Applications 185
11.2.4.2 Principle 185
11.2.4.3 Niacin 185
11.2.4.4 Folate 185

11.2.4.4.1 Principle 187
11.2.4.4.2 Critical Points 187
11.2.4.4.3 Procedure 187

S.S. Nielsen, Food Analysis, Food Science Texts Series, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1478-1_11,
c(cid:2) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

179

180

11.2.4.4.4 Calculations 187

11.2.5 Chemical Methods 188
11.2.5.1 Vitamin A 188

11.2.5.1.1 Principle 188
11.2.5.1.2 Critical Points 188
11.2.5.1.3 Procedure 188
11.2.5.1.4 Calculations 188

11.2.5.2 Vitamin E (Tocopherols
and Tocotrienols) 189
11.2.5.2.1 Vitamin E

Compounds 189

11.2.5.2.2 Principle 189
11.2.5.2.3 Critical Points 189
11.2.5.2.4 Procedure 189
11.2.5.2.5 Calculation 190

11.2.5.3 Vitamin C 190
11.2.5.3.1 2,6-

Dichloroindophenol
Titrimetric Method
(AOAC Method
967.21, 45.1.14)
(2, 9) 190

11.2.5.3.2 Microﬂuorometric

Method (AOAC
Method 967.22,
45.1.15) (2, 19) 191

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

11.2.5.4 Thiamin (Vitamin B1) in Foods,

Thiochrome Fluorometric
Procedure
(AOAC Method 942.23)
(2) 191
11.2.5.4.1 Principle 191
11.2.5.4.2 Critical Points 191
11.2.5.4.3 Procedure 192
11.2.5.4.4 Calculations 192

11.2.5.5 Riboﬂavin (Vitamin B2) in Foods

and Vitamin Preparations,
Fluorometric Method (AOAC
Method 970.65, 45.1.08)
(2) 193
11.2.5.5.1 Principle 193
11.2.5.5.2 Critical Points 193
11.2.5.5.3 Procedure 193
11.2.5.5.4 Calculations 193

11.3 Comparison of Methods 194
11.4 Summary 195
11.5 Study Questions 195
11.6 Practice Problems 195
11.7 References 199

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

11.1 INTRODUCTION

11.1.1 Deﬁnition and Importance
Vitamins are deﬁned as relatively low-molecular-
weight compounds which humans, and for that mat-
ter, any living organism that depends on organic mat-
ter as a source of nutrients, require small quantities
for normal metabolism. With few exceptions, humans
cannot synthesize most vitamins and therefore need
to obtain them from food and supplements. Insufﬁ-
cient levels of vitamins result in deﬁciency diseases
[e.g., scurvy and pellagra, which are due to the lack
of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) and niacin, respectively].

11.1.2 Importance of Analysis
Vitamin analysis of food and other biological sam-
ples has played a critical role in determining animal
and human nutritional requirements. Furthermore,
accurate food composition information is required to
determine dietary intakes to assess diet adequacy and
improve human nutrition worldwide. From the con-
sumer and industry points of view, reliable assay
methods are required to ensure accuracy of food label-
ing. This chapter provides an overview of techniques
for analysis of the vitamin content of food and some of
the problems associated with these techniques. Please
note that the sections below on bioassay, microbiologi-
cal, and chemical methods are not comprehensive, but
rather just give examples of each type of analysis.

11.1.3 Vitamin Units
When vitamins are expressed in units of mg or μ g per
tablet or food serving, it is very easy to grasp how
much is present. Vitamins can also be expressed as
international units (IU), United States Pharmacopeia
(USP) units, and % Daily Value (DV). To many, these
deﬁnitions are unclear. When analysis of a foodstuff
or dietary supplement is required for its content of
vitamins, as might be the case for labeling and qual-
ity control purposes, being able to report the ﬁndings
on different bases becomes important.

The IU is a unit of measurement for the amount
of a substance, based on measured biological activity
or effect. It is used for vitamins, hormones, vaccines,
and similar biologically active substances. The precise
deﬁnition of 1 IU differs from substance to substance,
but has been established by international agreement
for each substance. There is no equivalence among dif-
ferent substances; that is, 1 IU or USP unit of vitamin
E does not contain the same number of micrograms
as 1 IU or USP unit of vitamin A. Although IUs are
still employed in food fortiﬁcation and for nutrition

181

labeling in the US (e.g., dietary supplements), many
regulators feel that their use should be abandoned.

Concerning vitamin E, the USP discontinued the
use of the IU in the US after 1980 and replaced it
with USP units derived from the same biological activ-
ity values as the IU. Thus, 1 USP unit is deﬁned
as the activity of 1 mg of all-rac-α-tocopheryl acetate
on the basis of biological activity measured by the
rat fetal resorption assay. This equals the activity
of 0.67 mg of RRR-α-tocopherol or 0.74 mg of RRR-
α-tocopheryl acetate. Biological activities relative to
RRR-α-tocopherol have been a convenient way to
compare the different forms of vitamin E on the basis
of IU or USP units, and were used to calculate mil-
ligram α-tocopherol equivalent (mg α-TE) values for
reporting vitamin E contents. As vitamin E is avail-
able in different forms, conversion factors have been
established (1) (Table 11-1).

Some other IU deﬁnitions for vitamins include the

following:

• 1 IU of vitamin A is the biological equiva-
lent of 0.3 μ g retinol, 0.6 μ g β-carotene, and
1.2 μ g of other provitamin A active carotenoids
(e.g., α-carotene and β-cryptoxanthin). One
retinol equivalent (RE) is deﬁned as 1 μ g of
all-trans-retinol. Varying dietary sources of vita-
min A have different potencies. For calcula-
tion of RE values in foods, 100% efﬁciency of
absorption of all-trans-retinol is assumed; how-
ever, incomplete absorption and conversion of
β-carotene as well as other provitamin A active
carotenoids must be taken into account. The
conversion factors of 1 RE equals 6 μ g and
12 μ g for β-carotene and other provitamin A
active carotenoids, respectively, are applied.
A more recent international standard of mea-
sure of vitamin A established by the Institute
of Medicine of the National Academies is to
report μ g retinol activity equivalents (RAE). For
example, 2 μ g of β-carotene in oil provided as
a supplement can be converted by the body
to 1 μ g of retinol giving it an RAE ratio of
2:1, whereas 12 μ g of all-trans-β-carotene from
foods are required to provide the body with
1 μ g of retinol giving dietary β-carotene an RAE
ratio of 12:1. Other provitamin A carotenoids in
foods are less easily absorbed than β-carotene
resulting in RAE ratios of 24:1. So in food,
unlike a dietary supplement, there is no direct
comparison between an IU and μ g RE or RAE.
As a guide to convert IUs of vitamin A to μ g RE,
multiply the number of IUs by 0.1 if the food is
of plant origin and by 0.2 if it is of animal ori-
gin. The result will be the approximate number
of μ g RE in the food.

182

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

11-1
table

Conversion Factors to Calculate α-Tocopherol from International Units or United States
Pharmacopeia Units to Meet Dietary Reference Intakes for Vitamin E

Natural vitamin E

RRR-α-Tocopherol
RRR-α-Tocopheryl acetate
RRR-α-Tocopheryl acid succinate
all-rac-α-Tocopherol
all-rac-α-Tocopheryl acetate
all-rac-α-Tocopheryl acid succinate

Synthetic vitamin E

USPunit(IU)

mg−1

mgUSP
−1 (IU
−1)

unit

μmol USP
−1)
unit−1 (IU

αT mgUSP
−1)
unit−1(IU

1.49
1.36
1.21

1.10
1.00
0.89

0.67
0.74
0.83

0.91
1.00
1.12

1.56
1.56
1.56

2.12
2.12
2.12

0.67
0.67
0.67

0.45
0.45
0.45

USP, United States Pharmacopeia; IU, international unit; αT, α-tocopherol.
From: Reference (1), used with permission of Taylor & Francis Group, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

• 1 IU of vitamin C is the biological equivalent of
• 1 IU of vitamin D is the biological equivalent of

50 μ g L-ascorbic acid.

0.025 μ g cholecalciferol/ergocalciferol.

The % Daily Value (DV) is a newer dietary refer-
ence value designed to help consumers to use label
information to plan a healthy overall diet (see also
Chap. 3). The DVs are reference numbers based
on Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) estab-
lished by the Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute
of Medicine. On food labels, the numbers tell you the
% DV that one serving of this food provided as a per-
centage of established standards. In fact, DVs actually
comprise two sets of reference values for nutrients:
Daily Reference Values, or DRVs, and Reference Daily
Intakes, or RDIs. The % DV is based on a 2000-Calorie
diet for adults older than 18.

11.2 METHODS

11.2.1 Overview
Vitamin assays can be classiﬁed as follows:

1. Bioassays involving humans and animals.
2. Microbiological assays making use of proto-

zoan organisms, bacteria, and yeast.

3. Physicochemical assays that include spectro-
photometric, ﬂuorometric, chromatographic,
enzymatic,
immunological, and radiometric
methods.

In terms of ease of performance, but not necessarily
with regard to accuracy and precision, the three sys-
tems follow the reverse order. It is for this reason that
bioassays, on a routine basis at least, are limited in
their use to those instances in which no satisfactory
alternative method is available.

The selection criteria for a particular assay depend
on a number of factors, including accuracy and preci-
sion, but also economic factors and the sample load to
be handled. Applicability of certain methods for a par-
ticular matrix also must be considered. It is important
to bear in mind that many ofﬁcial methods presented
by regulatory agencies are limited in their applicability
to certain matrices, such as vitamin concentrates, milk,
or cereals, and thus cannot be applied to other matrices
without some procedural modiﬁcations, if at all.

On account of the sensitivity of certain vitamins
to adverse conditions such as light, oxygen, pH, and
heat, proper precautions need to be taken to prevent
any deterioration throughout the analytical process,
regardless of the type of assay employed. Such pre-
cautionary steps need to be followed with the test
material in bioassays throughout the feeding period.
They are required with microbiological and physico-
chemical methods during extraction as well as during
the analytical procedure.

Just as with any type of analysis, proper sampling
and subsampling as well as the preparation of a homo-
geneous sample are critical aspects of vitamin analysis.
General guidelines regarding this matter are provided
in Chap. 5 of this book.

The principles, critical points, procedures, and
calculations for various vitamin analysis methods
are described in this chapter. Many of the methods
cited are ofﬁcial methods of AOAC International (2),
the European Committee for Standardization (3–10),
or the US Pharmacopeial Convention (11). Refer to
these methods and other original references cited for
detailed instructions on procedures. A summary of
commonly used regulatory methods is provided in
Table 11-2. The sections below on bioassay, microbi-
ological, and chemical methods are not comprehen-
sive, but rather just give examples of each type of
analysis.

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

183

11-2
table

Vitamin

Commonly Used Regulatory Methods for Vitamin Analysis

MethodDesignation

Application

Approach

Fat-Soluble Vitamins

Vitamin A

(and precursors)
Retinol

Retinol

all-trans-retinol
13-cis-retinol

β-Carotene

β-Carotene

Vitamin D

Cholecalciferol
Ergocalciferol
Cholecalciferol
Ergocalciferol

Cholecalciferol
Ergocalciferol

Vitamin E

R, R, R – tocopherols

AOAC Method 992.04 (2)

AOAC Method
2001.13 (2)
EN 1283-1 (3)

AOAC Method
2005.07 (2)

EN 1283–2 (3)

Vitamin A in milk-based

infant formula

Vitamin A in foods

All foods

β-Carotene in

supplements and raw
materials

All foods

AOAC Method 936.14 (3)

Vitamin D in foods

AOAC Method 995.05 (3)

EN 1282172 (5)

Vitamin D in infant

formula and enteral
products

Vitamin D in foods

EN 12822 (6)

Vitamin E in foods

Vitamin K

Phylloquinone

AOAC Method 999.15 (2)

Vitamin K in milk and

infant formulas

Phylloquinone

EN 14148 (7)

Vitamin K in foods

Water-Soluble Vitamins

Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C)

Ascorbic acid

AOAC Method 967.21 (2)

Ascorbic acid

AOAC Method 967.22 (2)

Vitamin C in juices and
vitamin preparations

Vitamin C in vitamin

preparations

Ascorbic acid

Thiamin (Vitamin B1)
Thiamin
Thiamin·HCl

EN 14130 (8)

Vitamin C in foods

AOAC Method 942.23 (2)

Thiamin in foods

Thiamin

EN 14122 (9)

Thiamin in foods

LCa 340 nm

LC 328 or 313 nm

LC 325 nm or

Fluorometricb
Ex λ = 325 nm
Em λ = 475 nm
LC 445 or 444 nm

LC 450 nm

Bioassay

LC 265 nm

LC 265 nm

LC
Fluorescence
Ex λ = 295 nm
Em λ = 330 nm

LC postcolumn

reduction

Fluorescence

Ex λ = 243 nm
Em λ = 430 nm

LC postcolumn

reduction

Fluorescence
Ex λ = 243 nm
Em λ = 430 nm

2,6-Dichloroindophenol

titration

Fluorescence

Ex λ = 350 nm
Em λ = 430 nm

LC 265 nm

Thiochrome

Fluorescence
Ex λ = 365 nm
Em λ = 435 nm

LC
Thiochrome
Fluorescence
Ex λ = 366 nm
Em λ = 420 nm

(continued)

184

11-2
table

Vitamin

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

Commonly Used Regulatory Methods for Vitamin Analysis

MethodDesignation

Application

Approach

Riboﬂavin (Vitamin B2)

Riboﬂavin

AOAC Method 970.65 (2)

Riboﬂavin in foods and
vitamin preparations

Riboﬂavin

EN 14152 (10)

Riboﬂavin in foods

Fluorescence

Ex λ = 440 nm
Em λ = 565 nm

LC
Fluorescence

Ex λ = 468 nm
Em λ = 520 nm

LC Fluorescence
Ex λ = 290 nm
Em λ = 395 nm

Microbiological

Microbiological

LC 200 nm or

Microbiological

AOAC Method 944.13 (2)

Niacin and niacinamide in

vitamin preparations

Microbiological

AOAC Method 2004.07

(1, 2)

Total Vitamin B6 in infant

formula

AOAC Method 2004.05 (2)

AOAC Method 986.23 (2)

USP29/NF24, Dietary
supplements ofﬁcial
monograph (11)

AOAC Method 992.07 (2)

Total folates in cereals and

cereal products –
Trienzyme procedure

Cobalamin (Vitamin B12) in
milk-based infant formula

Biotin in dietary supplements

Pantothenic acid in

milk-based infant formula

Microbiological

Niacin

Nicotinic acid
Nicotinamide

Vitamin B6

Pyridoxine
Pyridoxal
Pyridoxamine

Folic Acid, Folate

Total folates

Vitamin B12

Cyanocobalamin

Biotin

Biotin

Pantothenic acid

Ca pantothenate

a LC, liquid chromatography (high-performance liquid chromatography).
b Fluorometric test, giving excitation (Ex) and emission (Em) wavelengths.

11.2.2 Extraction Methods
With the exception of some biological feeding studies,
vitamin assays in most instances involve the extraction
of a vitamin from its biological matrix prior to analysis.
This generally includes one or several of the following
treatments: heat, acid, alkali, solvents, and enzymes.
In general, extraction procedures are speciﬁc for
each vitamin and designed to stabilize the vitamin.
In some instances, some procedures are applicable to
the combined extraction of more than one vitamin, for
example, for thiamin and riboﬂavin as well as some
of the fat-soluble vitamins (1, 2, 13). Typical extraction
procedures are as follows:

phoric acid/acetic acid.

• Ascorbic acid: Cold extraction with metaphos-
• Vitamin B1 and B2: Boiling or autoclaving in acid
• Niacin: Autoclaving in acid (noncereal prod-

plus enzyme treatment.

ucts) or alkali (cereal products).

• Folate: Enzyme extraction with α-amylase,
protease and γ-glutamyl hydrolase(conjugase)
• Vitamins A, E, or D: Organic solvent extraction,
saponiﬁcation, and re-extraction with organic
solvents. For unstable vitamins such as these,
antioxidants are routinely added to inhibit
oxidation.

Analysis of fat-soluble vitamins may require saponiﬁ-
cation, generally either overnight at room temperature
or by reﬂuxing at 70
C. In the latter case, an air-cooled
reﬂux vessel as depicted in Fig. 11-1 provides excellent
control of conditions conducive to oxidation.

◦

11.2.3 Bioassay Methods
Outside of vitamin bioavailability studies, bioassays at
the present are used only for the analysis of vitamins
B12 and D. For the latter, it is the reference standard
method of analysis of food materials (AOAC Method

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

185

Bacteria, yeast, or protozoans are used as test organ-
isms. Growth can be measured in terms of turbidity,
acid production, gravimetry, or by respiration. With
bacteria and yeast,
turbidimetry is the most com-
monly employed system. If turbidity measurements
are involved, clear sample and standard extracts vs.
turbid ones, are essential. With regard to incuba-
tion time, turbidity measurement is also a less time-
consuming method. The microorganisms are speci-
ﬁed by ATCCTM numbers and are available from the
American Type Culture Collection (ATCCTM) (12301
Parkway Drive, Rockville, MD 20852).

11.2.4.3 Niacin
The procedural sequence for the microbiological anal-
ysis of niacin is outlined in Fig. 11-3 (AOAC Method
944.13, 45.2.04) (2,14). Lactobacillus plantarum ATCCTM
8014 is the test organism. A stock culture needs to be
prepared and maintained by inoculating the freeze-
dried culture on Bacto Lactobacilli agar followed by
incubation at 37
C for 24 h prior to sample and stan-
dard inoculation. A second transfer may be advisable
in the case of poor growth of the inoculum culture.

◦

In general, growth is measured by turbidity. If
lactobacilli are employed as the test organism, acidi-
metric measurements can be used as well. The lat-
ter may be necessary if a clear sample extract can-
not be obtained prior to inoculation, and incubation
(which is a prerequisite for turbidimetry) cannot be
obtained. In making a choice between the two meth-
ods of measurement, one needs to bear in mind that
a prolonged incubation period of 72 h is required for
acidimetry.

11.2.4.4 Folate
Folate is the general term including folic acid (pteroyl-
glutamate, PteGln) and poly-γ-glutamyl conjugates
with the biological activity of folic acid. Folates present
a diverse array of compounds that vary by oxidation
state of the pteridine ring structure, one-carbon moi-
eties carried by the speciﬁc folate, and the number of
conjugated glutamate residues on the folate. Folates
are labile to oxidation, light, thermal losses, and leach-
ing when foods are processed. Because of the presence
of multiple forms in food products and its instability,
folate presents a rather difﬁcult analytical problem. To
account for differences in biological availability of syn-
thetic folic acid used for food fortiﬁcation and food
folate, the Institute of Medicine Panel on Folate, Other
B Vitamins and Choline established the dietary folate
equivalent (DFE) value (5). Based on research showing
that folic acid is 85% bioavailable whereas food folate

11-1
f i g u r e

Reﬂux vessel useful for saponiﬁcation.

936.14), known as the line test (Fig. 11-2), based on
bone calciﬁcation. Because the determination of vita-
min D involves deﬁciency studies as well as sacriﬁcing
the test organisms, it is limited to animals rather than
humans as test organisms.

11.2.4 Microbiological Assays
11.2.4.1 Applications
Microbiological assays are limited to the analysis of
water-soluble vitamins. The methods are very sensi-
tive and speciﬁc for each vitamin. The methods are
somewhat time consuming, and strict adherence to
the analytical protocol is critical for accurate results.
All microbiological assays can use microtiter plates
(96-well) in place of test tubes. Microplate usage
results in signiﬁcant savings in media and glassware,
as well as labor.

11.2.4.2 Principle
The growth of microorganisms is proportional to their
requirement for a speciﬁc vitamin. Thus, in microbi-
ological assays the growth of a certain microorgan-
ism in an extract of a vitamin-containing sample is
compared against the growth of this microorganism
in the presence of known quantities of that vitamin.

186

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

VITAMIN D BIOASSAY PROCEDURE

Sample Preparation

AOAC International provides speciﬁc instructions for preparation of various matrices for the
bioassay. In some cases, saponiﬁcation is used.

Rats are suitable for depletion at age ≤30 days with body weight of ≥44 g but ≤60 g.
A rachitogenic diet is fed for 18–25 days.

Depletion Period

Assay Period

The assay period is the interval of life of the rat between the last day of the depletion period
and the eighth or eleventh day thereafter. Feeding protocols are speciﬁed. During the assay,
depleted rats are fed known and unknown amounts of vitamin D from standards and samples,
respectively.

Potency of Sample

Vitamin D in the sample is determined by the line test from staining of the proximal end of the
tibia or distal end of the radius or ulna.

The bioassay of vitamin D by the line test, AOAC Method 936.14, 45.3.01 (2).

NIACIN MICROBIOLOGICAL ASSAY PROCEDURE

11-2
f i g u r e

Test Sample Preparation

Weigh out a sufﬁcient amount of sample to contain ≤5.0 mg niacin/ml, add volume of 1 N
H2SO4 equal in ml to ≥10X dry weight of test portion in g, macerate, autoclave 30 min at
121–123
solution, dilute with deionized H2O to volume (ca. 0.1–0.4 μ g niacin/ml), mix, and ﬁlter.

C, and cool. If dissolved protein is not present, adjust mixture to pH 6.8 with NaOH

◦

Assay Tube Preparation

In at least duplicate use 0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0 ml test sample ﬁltrate and make up the
difference to 5.0 ml with deionized H2O, then add 5.0 ml of DifcoTM Niacin Assay Medium to
each tube, autoclave 10 min at 121–123

C, and cool.

◦

Niacin Standard Preparation

Prepare assay tubes in at least duplicate using 0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0 ml
standard working solution (0.1–0.4 μ g niacin/ml), make up difference to 5.0 ml with deionized
H2O, then add 5.0 ml of DifcoTM Niacin Assay Medium and treat identically as the sample
tubes.

Inoculation and Incubation

Prepare inoculum using Lactobacillus plantarum ATCCTM 8014 in DifcoTM Lactobacilli Broth
AOAC. Add one drop of inoculum to each tube, cover tubes, and then incubate at 37
C for
16–24 hr; that is, until maximum turbidity is obtained as demonstrated by lack of signiﬁcant
change during a 2-hr additional incubation period in tubes containing the highest concentration
of niacin.

◦

Determination

Measure %T at any speciﬁc wavelength between 540 and 660 nm. Set transmittance to 100%
with the inoculated blank sample. Prepare a standard concentration-response curve by plotting
%T readings for each level of standard solution used against amount of reference standard
contained in respective tubes. Determine the amount of niacin for each level of the test solution
by interpolation from the standard curve.

The microbiological assay of niacin, AOAC Method 944.13, 45.2.04 (2).

11-3
f i g u r e

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

187

is only 50%, it can be stated that folic acid in forti-
ﬁed products is 85/50 or 1.7 times more bioavailable
than food folate. Therefore, the μ g of DFEs provided
equals the μ g of food folate plus (1.7 × μ g folic acid).
Calculation of the μ g DFE for any food requires quanti-
tation of folic acid as a separate entity from food folate.
Currently, quite sophisticated liquid chromatography
methods are necessary for accurate quantitation of
folic acid and the multiple forms of folates in foods. A
collaborated microbiological procedure based on the
trienzyme extraction quantiﬁes only total folate and
cannot differentiate between added folic acid and food
folate. The microbiological assay for total food folate
with Lactobacillus casei (spp. rhamnosus) ATCCTM 7469
and trienzyme digestion follows AOAC International
(2, 15).

◦

11.2.4.4.1 Principle Folate in the sample is extracted
with a buffer at 100
C (boiling water bath). The extract
is then digested with α-amylase and protease (i.e., to
free macromolecularly bound folates) and conjugase
(i.e., to cleave poly-γ-glutamyl folates to PteGln3 or
lower.) Growth response of the assay microorganism
is measured by percent transmittance. Transmittance
depends on folate concentration.

11.2.4.4.2 Critical Points Care must be exercised to
protect labile folates from oxidation and photochem-
ical degradation. Reducing agents including ascorbic
acid, β-mercaptoethanol, and dithiothreitol are effec-
tive in preventing oxidation. Strict adherence to micro-
biological assay techniques is necessary to assay folate
with accuracy and precision.

11.2.4.4.3 Procedure Analysis of
food folate by
Lactobacillus casei (spp. rhamnosus) ATCCTM 7469 and a
trienzyme extraction procedure (Fig. 11-4) is provided
by AOAC International (2). The analytical protocol
has also been easily adapted using 96-well microtiter
plates and a reader (16).

11.2.4.4.4 Calculations Results are calculated man-
ually or from the regression line of the standard curve
responses using 4th degree polynomial plots and a
computer program written to conform to the AOAC
microbiological analysis protocol. Software provided
for microplate readers is suitable for calculating results
from analyses using 96-well microplates. Results are
reported as micrograms of vitamin per 100 g or per
serving.

FOLATE MICROBIOLOGICAL ASSAY PROCEDURE

Sample Preparation

To 1.2–2.0 g of sample, add 50 ml of speciﬁed buffer, homogenize, and proceed to digestion
step. (Note: High fat samples should be extracted with hexane, and all samples should be
protected from light and air.)

Trienzyme Digestion

Boil samples for 5 min and cool to room temperature. Digest each sample with speciﬁed
α-amylase, protease, and conjugase. Deactivate enzymes by boiling for 5 min. Cool tubes, ﬁlter,
and dilute an appropriate aliquot to a ﬁnal concentration of ca. 0.15 ng/ml.

Preparation of Standard Curve and Blank Tubes

Construct an 8-point standard curve using a working standard solution of folate. Add 5 ml of
Lactobacillus casei (spp. rhamnosus) ATCCTM 7469 assay medium to each tube. Prepare an
uninoculated blank and an inoculated blank to zero the spectrophotometer, and an enzyme
blank to determine the contribution of the enzymes to microbial growth.

Assay

Folic acid is assayed by the growth of Lactobacillus casei (spp. rhamnosus) ATCCTM 7469
according to AOAC International (2). Prepared tubes of samples, standard curve, inoculated
and uninoculated blanks, and enzyme blank are autoclaved at 121–123
C for 5 min and then
inoculated with one drop of the prepared inoculum per tube. After tubes have been incubated
C for 20–24 hr, the growth response is measured by percent transmittance at λ = 550 nm.
at 37

◦

◦

11-4
f i g u r e

Analysis of folate in cereals and cereal products or other foods using Lactobacillus casei (spp. rhamnosus) ATCCTM
7469 and a trienzyme extraction procedure (2).

188

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

11.2.5 Chemical Methods
11.2.5.1 VitaminA
Vitamin A is sensitive to ultraviolet (UV) light, air
(and any prooxidants, for that matter), high temper-
atures, and moisture. Therefore, steps must be taken
to avoid any adverse changes in this vitamin due to
such effects. Steps include using low actinic glassware,
nitrogen, and/or vacuum, as well as avoiding exces-
sively high temperatures. The addition of an antiox-
idant at the onset of the procedure is highly recom-
mended. High-performance liquid chromatographic
(HPLC) methods are considered the only acceptable
methods to provide accurate food measurements of
vitamin A activity.

Details follow for the HPLC method of vitamin
A (i.e., retinol isomers) in milk and milk-based infant
formula (AOAC Method 992.04, 50.1.02) (2):

11.2.5.1.1 Principle The test sample is saponiﬁed
with ethanolic KOH, vitamin A (retinol) is extracted
into organic solvent and then concentrated. Vitamin A
isomers – all-trans-retinol and 13-cis-retinol – levels are
determined by HPLC on a silica column.

11.2.5.1.2 Critical Points All work must be per-
formed in subdued artiﬁcial light. Care must be taken
to avoid oxidation of the retinol throughout the entire
procedure. Solvent evaporation should be completed
under nitrogen, and hexadecane is added to prevent
destruction during and after solvent evaporation.

11.2.5.1.3 Procedure Figure 11-5 outlines the proce-
dural steps of the assay. Pyrogallol is added prior to
saponiﬁcation as an antioxidant.

11.2.5.1.4 Calculations

all-trans-retinol(ng/ml milk or diluted formula)
= (At/Ast) × Wt × Ct × DF

[1]

where:

At = peak area, all-trans-retinol in test sample
Ast = peak area, all-trans-retinol in standard
Wt = weight, mg, oil solution used to prepare

working standard solution

solution

Ct = concentration, ng/ml, all-trans-retinol in oil
DF = dilution factor = 1/50 × 25/15 × 100/3
×1/2 × 1/40 = 5/360

VITAMIN A HPLC ANALYSIS PROCEDURE

Test Sample Saponiﬁcation

Transfer 40 ml of ready-to-use formula or ﬂuid milk to a 100-ml digestion ﬂask containing a
stirring bar. For saponiﬁcation, add 10 ml of ethanolic pyrogallol solution (i.e., 2% (w/v)
pyrogallol in 95% ethanol) and 40-ml ethanolic KOH (i.e., 10% (w/v) KOH in 90% ethanol).
Wrap the ﬂask in aluminum foil and stir at room temperature for 18 hr, or at 70
C using the
reﬂux vessel as depicted in Fig. 11-1. Dilute to volume with ethanolic pyrogallol solution.

◦

Extraction of Digest

Pipet 3 ml of digestate into a 15-ml centrifuge tube and add 2 ml of deionized H2O. Extract
Vitamin A with 7-ml of hexane:diethyl ether (85:15, v/v). Repeat extraction 2X with 7-ml
portions of extractant. After extractions, transfer the organic layer to a 25-ml volumetric ﬂask.
Add 1 ml of hexadecane solution (i.e., 1-ml hexadecane in 100-ml hexane) and dilute to volume
with hexane. Pipette 15 ml of diluted extract into a test tube and evaporate under nitrogen.
Dissolve the residue in 0.5 ml of heptane.

Chromatography Parameters

Column
Mobile Phase
Injection Volume
Detection
Flow Rate

4.6 mm x 150 mm packed with 3-μ m silica (Apex 3-μ m silica)
Isocratic elution; heptane containing 2-propanol (1-5%, v/v)
100 μ l
UV, 340 nm
1-2 ml/min

Inject 100-μ l standard working solutions (see AOAC Method 992.04, 50.1.02 for details) into the
HPLC. Inject 100-μ l test extract. Measure peak areas for all-trans-retinol and 13-cis-retinol.
Note: The exact mobile phase composition and ﬂow rate are determined by system suitability
test to give retention times of 4.5 and 5.5 min for 13-cis-retinol and all-trans-retinol, respectively.

The HPLC analysis of vitamin A in milk and milk-based infant formula, AOAC Method 992.04, 50.1.02 (2).

11-5
f i g u r e

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

189

13-cis-retinol(ng/ml milk or diluted formula)
= (Ac/Asc) × Wc × Cc × DF

[2]

where:

Ac = peak area, 13-cis-retinol in test sample
Asc = peak area, 13-cis-retinol in standard
Wc = weight, mg, oil solution used to prepare

working standard solution

Cc = concentration, ng/ml, 13-cis-retinol in oil
DF = dilution factor = 1/50 × 25/15 × 100/3 ×

solution
1/2 × 1/40 = 5/360

11.2.5.2 VitaminE(Tocopherols
andTocotrienols)
11.2.5.2.1 Vitamin E Compounds Vitamin E is
present in foods as eight different compounds: all
are 6-hydroxychromans. The vitamin E family is com-
prised of α-, β-, γ-, and δ-tocopherol, characterized by
a saturated side chain of three isoprenoid units and
the corresponding unsaturated tocotrienols (α-, β-, γ-,
and δ-). All homologs in nature are (R, R, R)-isomers.
Recently, the Institute of Medicine Panel on Dietary
Antioxidants and Related Compounds recommended
that human requirements for vitamin E include only

the 2R-stereoisomeric forms of α-tocopherol for estab-
lishment of recommended intakes (17). For the past
two decades human requirements have been stated in
terms of α-tocopherol equivalents.

Details follow of vitamin E analysis in food prod-

ucts using HPLC (18):

11.2.5.2.2 Principle

1. General food products. The sample is saponi-
ﬁed under reﬂux (see Fig. 11-1), extracted with
hexane, and injected onto a normal phase
HPLC column connected to a ﬂuorescence
detector, Ex λ = 290 nm, Em λ = 330 nm (Ex,
excitation; Em, emission; see Chap. 22, Sect.
22.3).

2. Margarine and vegetable oil spreads. The sam-
ple is dissolved in hexane, anhydrous MgSO4 is
added to remove water, and the ﬁltered extracts
are assayed by HPLC.

3. Oils. Oil is dissolved in hexane and injected

directly onto the HPLC column.

11.2.5.2.3 CriticalPoints Vitamin E is subject to oxi-
dation. Therefore, saponiﬁcation is completed under
reﬂux, in the presence of the antioxidant, pyrogallol,
with the reaction vessel protected from light.

11.2.5.2.4 Procedure The vitamin E assay is detai-
led in Fig. 11-6 and an example chromatogram is
depicted in Fig. 11-7.

VITAMIN E HPLC ANALYSIS PROCEDURE

Sample Preparation

◦

a. General food products: Add 10 ml of 6% (w/v) pyrogallol in 95% ethanol to sample,
C for 10 min with sonication. Add 2 ml of 60% (w/v)
mix, and ﬂush with N2. Heat at 70
KOH solution, mix, and ﬂush with N2. Digest for 30 min at 70
C. Sonicate 5 min. Cool to
room temperature, and add sodium chloride and deionized H2O. Extract 3X with hexane
(containing 0.1% BHT). Combine hexane extracts. Add 0.5 g of anhydrous MgSO4 and
mix. Filter through a Millipore ﬁltration apparatus (0.45 μ m). Dilute to volume with
hexane. Inject sample into HPLC.
b. Margarine and vegetable oil spreads: Add 40 ml of hexane (containing 0.1% BHT) to a
10-g sample and mix. Add 3 g of anhydrous MgSO4, mix, let stand ≥2 hr. Filter and
dilute combined ﬁltrate to volume with hexane (0.1% BHT). Inject sample into HPLC.

◦

Column

LiChrosorb Si 60 (4 mm × 250 mm, 5-μ m

Chromatography Parameters
Hibar R(cid:2)
particle size) and LiChromCART R(cid:2)
packed with LiChrospher R(cid:2)
Isocratic, 0.85% (v/v) 2-propanol in hexane
20 μ l
1 ml/min
Fluorescence, Exλ = 290 nm, Emλ = 330 nm

Si 60 (5 μ m)

Mobile Phase
Injection Volume
Flow
Detector
(Note: Determine recovery for each food product.)

4-4 guard column

Analysis of vitamin E in food products using HPLC. [Adapted from (18).] Refer to (18) for details on applications.

11-6
f i g u r e

190

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

Chromatogram of rice bran oil showing tocopherols and tocotrienols.

11-7
f i g u r e

Titrant

HO

N

Cl

Cl

O

HO

NH

Cl

Cl

OH

2,6-dichlorindophenol

(red)

reduced 2,6-dichlorindophenol

(colorless)

HO

HO

O

O

H

HO

OH

L-ascorbic acid

(colorless)

HO

HO

H

O

O

O

O

L-dehydroascrorbic acid

(brown)

Chemical reaction between L-ascorbic acid and the indicator dye, 2,6-dichloroindophenol.

11-8
f i g u r e

11.2.5.2.5 Calculation Vitamin E is quantitated
by external standards from peak area by linear
regression.

11.2.5.3 VitaminC
The vitamin (L-ascorbic acid and L-dehydroascorbic
acid) is very susceptible to oxidative deterioration,
which is enhanced by high pH and the presence of
ferric and cupric ions. For these reasons, the entire
analytical procedure needs to be performed at low
pH and, if necessary, in the presence of a chelating
agent.

Mild oxidation of ascorbic acid results in the
formation of dehydroascorbic acid, which is also
biologically active and is reconvertible to ascorbic
acid by treatment with reducing agents such as
β-mercaptoethanol and dithiothreitol.

11.2.5.3.1 2,6-Dichloroindophenol Titrimetric Method
(AOACMethod967.21,45.1.14)(2,9)

1. Principle. L-ascorbic acid is oxidized to L-dehy-
droascorbic acid by the oxidation–reduction
indicator dye, 2,6-dichloroindophenol. At the
endpoint, excess unreduced dye appears rose-
pink in acid solution (see Fig. 11-8).

2. Procedure. Figure 11-9 outlines the protocol
followed for this method. In the presence of sig-
niﬁcant amounts of ferrous Fe, cuprous Cu, and
stannous Sn ions in the biological matrix to be
analyzed, it is advisable to include a chelating
agent such as ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
(EDTA) with the extraction to avoid overesti-
mation of the ascorbic acid content.

The light but distinct rose-pink endpoint
should last more than 5 s to be valid. With
colored samples such as red beets or heavily

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

191

VITAMIN C ASSAY PROCEDURE 2,6-DICHLOROINDOPHENOL TITRATION

Sample Preparation

Weigh and extract by homogenizing test sample in metaphosphoric acid-acetic acid solution (i.e.,
15 g of HPO3 and 40 ml of HOAc in 500 ml of deionized H2O). Filter (and/or centrifuge) sample
extract, and dilute appropriately to a ﬁnal concentration of 10–100 mg of ascorbic acid/100 ml.

Weigh 50 mg of USP L-ascorbic acid reference standard and dilute to 50 ml with HPO3-HOAc
extracting solution.

Standard Preparation

Titration

Titrate three replicates each of the standard (i.e., to determine the concentration of the indophe-
nol solution as mg ascorbic acid equivalents to 1.0 ml of reagent), test sample, and blank with
the indophenol reagent (i.e., prepared by dissolving 50 mg of 2,6-dichloroindophenol sodium
salt and 42 mg of NaHCO3 to 200 ml with deionized H2O) to a light but distinctive rose pink
endpoint lasting ≥5 sec.

11-9
f i g u r e

Analysis of vitamin C by the 2,6-dichloroindophenol titration, AOAC Method 967.21, 45.1.14 (2). [Adapted from
(19), pp. 334–336.]

browned products, the endpoint is impossible
to detect by human eyes. In such cases it, there-
fore, needs to be determined by observing the
change of transmittance using a spectropho-
tometer with the wavelength set at 545 nm.

3. Calculations.

mg of ascorbic acid/g or ml of sample
= (X − B) × (F/E) × (V/Y)

[3]

where:

X = average ml for test solution titration
B = average ml for test blank titration
F = mg ascorbic acid equivalents to 1.0-ml

indophenol standard solution

E = sample weight (g) or volume (ml)
V = volume of initial test solution
Y = volume of test solution titrated

prior to the addition of the o-phenylenediamine
solution.

3. Calculations.

mg of ascorbic acid/g or ml
= [(X − D)/(C − B)] × S × (DF/E) [4]

where:
X and C = average ﬂuorescence of

sample and standard, respectively

D and B = average ﬂuorescence of sample

blank and standard blank,
respectively

S = concentration of standard in mg/ml

DF = dilution factor

E = sample weight, g, or sample

volume, ml

Note. The (V/Y) term represents the dilution fac-

tor employed.

11.2.5.3.2 Microﬂuorometric Method (AOAC Method
967.22,45.1.15)(2,19)

1. Principle. This method measures both ascorbic
acid and dehydroascorbic acid. Ascorbic acid,
following oxidation to dehydroascorbic acid, is
reacted with o-phenylenediamine to produce a
ﬂuorescent quinoxaline compound.

2. Procedure. The procedural sequences for this
method are outlined in Fig. 11-10. To compen-
sate for the presence of interfering extraneous
material, blanks need to be run using boric acid

11.2.5.4 Thiamin(VitaminB1)inFoods,
ThiochromeFluorometricProcedure
(AOAC Method 942.23) (2)
11.2.5.4.1 Principle Following extraction, enzymatic
hydrolysis of thiamin’s phosphate esters and chro-
matographic cleanup (i.e., puriﬁcation), this method
is based on the ﬂuorescence measurement of the oxi-
dized form of thiamin, thiochrome, in the test solution
compared to that from an oxidized thiamin standard
solution.

11.2.5.4.2 Critical Points Thiochrome is light sen-
sitive. Therefore, the analytical steps following the
oxidation must be performed under subdued light.
Thiamin is sensitive to heat, especially at alkaline

192

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

VITAMIN C MICROFLUOROMETRIC ASSAY PROCEDURE

Sample Preparation

Prepare sample extract as outlined in Fig. 11-8. To 100 ml each of the ascorbic acid standard and
test sample solutions add 2 g of acid-washed Norit R(cid:2)
discarding the ﬁrst few ml.

Neutral, shake vigorously, and ﬁlter,

Ascorbic Acid Standard and Test Sample Blanks

Transfer 5 ml of each ﬁltrate to separate 100-ml volumetric ﬂasks containing 5 ml of
H3BO3-NaOAc solution. Let stand 15 min, swirling occasionally. Designate as standard or test
sample blank. Development of the ﬂuorescent quinoxaline is prevented by the formation of a
H3BO3-dehydroascorbic acid complex prior to the addition of the o-phenylenediamine reagent.
At the appropriate time, dilute blank solutions to volume with deionized H2O. Transfer 2 ml of
these solutions to each of three ﬂuorescence tubes.

Ascorbic Acid Standard and Test Samples

Transfer 5 ml of each standard and test sample ﬁltrate to separate 100-ml volumetric ﬂasks
containing 5 ml of 50% (w/v) NaOAc trihydrate and ca. 75 ml of H2O, swirl contents, and then
dilute to volume with deionized H2O. Transfer 2 ml of these solutions to each of three
ﬂuorescence tubes.

Formation of Quinoxaline

To all sample and blank tubes, add 5 ml of 0.02% (w/v) aqueous o-phenylenediamine reagent,
swirl contents using a Vortex mixer, and allow to stand at room temperature with protection
from light for 35 min.

Measure ﬂuorescence of sample and blank tubes at Ex λ = 350 nm, Em λ = 430 nm.

Determination

11-10
f i g u r e

Analysis of vitamin C by the microﬂuorometric method, AOAC Method 967.22, 45.1.15 (2). [Adapted from (20),
pp. 338–341.]

pH. The analytical steps beginning with the oxidation
of thiamin through to the ﬂuorescence measurement
(Fig. 11-11) must be carried out rapidly and precisely
according to the instructions.

11.2.5.4.3 Procedure Figure 11-11 outlines the pro-
cedural sequence of the thiamin analysis. The enzy-
matic treatment and subsequent chromatographic
cleanup may not be necessary with certain matrices,
such as vitamin concentrates that contain nonphos-
phorylated thiamin and no signiﬁcant amounts of
substances that could interfere with the determination.

11.2.5.4.4 Calculations

μ g of thiamin in 5 ml of test solution
= [(I − b/S − d)]

[5]

where:

I and b = ﬂuorescence of extract from

oxidized test sample and sample blank,
respectively

S and d = ﬂuorescence of extract from

oxidized standard and standard blank,
respectively

μ g of thiamin/g
= [(I − b/S − d)] × C/A × 25/Vp × Vo/WT [6]

where:

I and b = ﬂuorescence of extract from oxidized

test sample and sample blank,
respectively

S and d = ﬂuorescence of extract from oxidized

standard and standard blank,
respectively

C = concentration of thiamin · HCl standard,

μ g/ml

A = aliquot taken, ml
25 = ﬁnal volume of column eluate, ml
Vp = volume passed through the

chromatographic column, ml

Vo = dilution volume of original sample, ml
WT = sample weight, g

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

193

THIAMIN ANALYSIS BY THIOCHROME PROCEDURE

Weigh out sample containing thiamin, add volume of 0.1 M HCl equal in ml to ≥10X dry
weight of test portion in g, mix, autoclave for 30 min at 121–123
HCl to measured volume containing ca. 0.2–5 μ g thiamin/ml.

C, then cool. Dilute with 0.1 M

◦

Sample Preparation

Enzyme Hydrolysis

Take aliquot containing ca. 10–25 μ g thiamin, dilute to ca. 65 ml with 0.1 M HCl and adjust pH
to 4.0–4.5 with ca. 5-ml 2 M CH3COONa. Add 5 ml of enzyme solution, mix, incubate for 3 hr at
45–50

C. Cool, adjust to ca. pH 3.5, dilute to 100 ml with deionized H2O, and ﬁlter.

◦

Sample Extract Cleanup

Apply an aliquot of the test sample extract containing ca. 5 μ g thiamin to a speciﬁed
ion-exchange resin column, and wash column with 3X 5-ml portions of almost boiling water.
Then elute thiamin from the resin with 5X 4.0 to 4.5-ml portions of almost boiling acid-KCl
solution. Collect the eluate in a 25-ml volumetric ﬂask and dilute to volume with acid-KCl
solution. Treat standards identically.

Oxidation of Thiamin to Thiochrome

To a test tube, add 1.5 g of NaCl and 5 ml of the thiamin · HCl standard solution (1 μ g/ml).
Add 3 ml of oxidizing reagent [i.e., basic K3Fe(CN)6], swirl contents, then add 13 ml of
isobutanol, shake vigorously, and centrifuge. Repeat steps for the standard blank but instead
replace the oxidizing reagent with 3 ml of 15% (w/v) NaOH. Decant the isobutanol extracts
(i.e., the standard and blank) into ﬂuorescence reading tubes, and measure at Ex λ = 365 nm
and Em λ = 435 nm. Treat the test solution identically, and record the ﬂuorescence intensity of
the test sample and blank.

11-11
f i g u r e

Analysis of thiamin (vitamin B1) by the thiochrome ﬂuorometric procedure, AOAC Method 942.2.3, 45.1.05 (2).
Refer to (2) for more details on procedure.

11.2.5.5 Riboﬂavin(VitaminB2)inFoodsand
VitaminPreparations,FluorometricMethod
(AOAC Method 970.65, 45.1.08) (2)

11.2.5.5.1 Principle Following extraction, cleanup,
and compensation for the presence of interfering sub-
stances, riboﬂavin is determined ﬂuorometrically.

11.2.5.5.2 Critical Points Due to the extreme sensi-
tivity of the vitamin to UV radiation, all operations
need to be conducted under subdued light. The ana-
lyst also needs to be aware that exact adherence to
the permanganate oxidation process is essential for
reliable results.

11.2.5.5.3 Procedure An outline of the procedural
protocol for this analysis is shown in Fig. 11-12. In spite
of the fact that riboﬂavin is classiﬁed as a water-soluble
vitamin, it does not readily dissolve in water. When
preparing the standard solution,
the analyst must
pay special attention and ensure that the riboﬂavin is
completely dissolved.

11.2.5.5.4 Calculations

mg of riboﬂavin/ml ﬁnal test solution
= [(B − C)/(X − B)] × 0.10 × 0.001

[7]

where:
B and C = ﬂuorescence of test sample containing

water and sodium dithionite, respectively

X = ﬂuorescence of test sample containing

riboﬂavin standard

Note. Value of [(B − C)/(X − B)] must be ≥0.66

and ≤1.5)

mg of riboﬂavin/g of sample
= [(B − C)/(X − B)] x (CS/V) x (DF/WT) [8]

where:
B and C = ﬂuorescence of sample containing water

and sodium hydrosulﬁte, respectively

X = ﬂuorescence of sample containing

riboﬂavin standard

CS = concentration of standard expressed as

mg/ml

194

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

RIBOFLAVIN ASSAY PROCEDURE BY FLUORESCENCE

Sample Preparation

Weigh out homogenized sample, add volume of 0.1 M HCl equal in ml to ≥10X dry weight of
test portion in g; the resulting solution must contain ≤0.1 mg riboﬂavin/ml. Mix contents,
autoclave for 30 min at 121–123
C and then cool. Precipitate interfering substances by adjusting
pH to 6.0–6.5 with dilute NaOH immediately followed by a pH readjustment to 4.5 with dilute
HCl. Dilute with deionized H2O to ca. 0.1 μ g of riboﬂavin/ml, and ﬁlter.

◦

Oxidation of Interfering Materials

Oxidize as follows: Transfer 10 ml of test ﬁltrate to each of four tubes. To two of these tubes,
add 1.0 ml of deionized H2O, and to the remaining ones add 1.0 ml of a standard solution (i.e.,
1 μ g/ml of riboﬂavin). Then to each tube, one at a time, add 1.0 ml of glacial HOAc followed by
0.5 ml of 4% (w/v) KMnO4. Allow the mixture to stand for 2 min, and then add 0.5 ml of 3%
(v/v) H2O2. Shake vigorously until excess O2 is expelled.

Measurement of Fluorescence

Measure ﬂuorescence at Ex λ = 440 nm and Em λ = 565 nm. First read test samples containing
1 ml of added standard riboﬂavin solution, and then samples containing 1 ml of deionized
H2O. Add, with mixing, 20 mg of Na2S2O4 to two of the tubes, and measure the minimum
ﬂuorescence within 5 sec.

Analysis of riboﬂavin (vitamin B2) by ﬂuorescence, AOAC Method 970.65, 45.1.08 (2).

11-12
f i g u r e

V = volume of sample for ﬂuorescence

measurement, ml

DF = dilution factor
WT = weight of sample, g

11.3 COMPARISON OF METHODS

Each type of method has its advantages and disad-
vantages. In selecting a certain method of analysis
for a particular vitamin or vitamins, a number of fac-
tors need to be considered, some of which are listed
below:

1. Method accuracy and precision.
2. The need for bioavailability information.
3. Time and instrumentation requirements.
4. Personnel requirements.
5. The type of biological matrix to be analyzed.
6. The number of samples to be analyzed.
7. Regulatory requirements – Must ofﬁcial AOAC

International methods be used?

Bioassays are extremely time consuming. Their
employment is generally limited to those instances
in which no suitable alternate method is available,
or for cases in which bioavailability of the analyte is
desired, especially if other methods have not been
demonstrated to provide this information. Bioassays
have the advantage that they sometimes do not require
the preparation of an extract, thus eliminating the

potential of undesirable changes of the analyte dur-
ing the extract preparation. On the other hand, in the
case of deﬁciency development requirements prior to
analysis, bioassays are limited to animals rather than
humans.

Both microbiological and physicochemical meth-
ods require vitamin extraction (i.e., solubilization prior
to analysis). In general, the results obtained through
these methods represent the total content of a particu-
lar vitamin in a certain biological matrix, such as food,
and not necessarily its bioavailability to humans.

The applicability of microbiological assays is lim-
ited to water-soluble vitamins, and most commonly
applied to niacin, B12, and pantothenic acid. Though
somewhat time consuming, they generally can be used
for the analysis of a relatively wide array of biological
matrices without major modiﬁcations. Furthermore,
less sample preparation is often required compared to
physicochemical assays.

Because of their relative simplicity, accuracy, and
precision, the physicochemical methods, in particular
the chromatographic methods using HPLC, are pre-
ferred. For example, standard HPLC is commonly
employed as an ofﬁcial method of analysis for vita-
mins A, E, and D, and as a quality control method
for vitamin C. While HPLC involves a high capital
outlay,
it is applicable to most vitamins and lends
itself in some instances to simultaneous analysis of
several vitamins and/or vitamers (i.e., isomers of vita-
mins). Implementation of multianalyte procedures for
the analysis of water-soluble vitamins can result in

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

195

assay efﬁciency with savings in time and materials. To
be useful, a simultaneous assay must not lead to loss
of sensitivity, accuracy, and precision when compared
to single analyte methods. In general terms, multi-
analyte methods for water-soluble vitamin assay of
high concentration products including pharmaceuti-
cals, supplements, and vitamin premixes are quite
easily developed. Though the applicability of HPLC
has been demonstrated to a wide variety of biolog-
ical matrices with no or only minor modiﬁcations
in some cases, one must always bear in mind that
all chromatographic techniques, including HPLC, are
separation and not identiﬁcation methods. Therefore,
during adaptation of an existing HPLC method to a
new matrix, establishing evidence of peak identity and
purity is an essential step of the method adaptation or
development.

Over the past decade, liquid chromatography in
combination with mass spectrometry (MS) (see Chap.
26) has added a new dimension to vitamin analy-
sis. In general, LC–MS methods are now available
for each fat- and water-soluble vitamin. Detection by
MS leads to increased sensitivity as well as unequiv-
ocal identiﬁcation and characterization of the vitamin.
The LC–MS assays are rapidly becoming a mainstay of
accurate, cost-effective vitamin analyses. For example,
LC–MS is commonly employed for veriﬁcation of vita-
min D content of products with difﬁcult matrices (i.e.,
comparing results to those with standard LC analy-
sis), and LC–MS/MS for folate (vs. the microbiological
method). The reader is referred to reference (12) for
applications of LC–MS to speciﬁc vitamins.

When selecting a system for analysis, at least ini-
tially, it is wise to consider the use of ofﬁcial methods
that have been tested through interlaboratory stud-
ies and that are published by such organizations as
AOAC International (2), the European Committee for
Standardization (3–10), the US Pharmacopeial Con-
vention (11), or the AACC International (21). Again,
one must realize that these methods are limited to
certain biological matrices.

accuracy and precision. Method validation is espe-
cially important with chromatographic methods such
as HPLC, because these methods basically accent sep-
arations rather than identiﬁcation of compounds. For
this reason, it is essential to ensure not only identity
of these compounds but also, just as important, their
purity.

11.5 STUDY QUESTIONS

1. What factors should be considered in selecting the assay

for a particular vitamin?

2. To be quantitated by most methods, vitamins must be
extracted from foods. What treatments are commonly
used to extract the vitamins? For one fat-soluble vita-
min and one water-soluble vitamin, give an appropriate
extraction procedure.

3. What two vitamins must be listed on the standard nutri-

tional label?

4. The standard by which all chemical methods to measure
vitamin D content are compared is a bioassay method.
Describe this bioassay method.

5. Explain why it is possible to use microorganisms to quan-
titate a particular vitamin in a food product, and describe
such a procedure.

6. Niacin and folate both can be quantitated by microbiolog-
ical methods. What extra procedures and precautions are
necessary in the folate assay compared to the niacin assay,
and why?

7. There are two commonly used AOAC methods to mea-
sure the vitamin C content of foods. Identify these two
methods; then compare and contrast them with regard to
the principles involved.

8. Would the vitamin C content as determined by the 2,6-
dichloroindophenol method be underestimated or over-
estimated in the case of heat processed juice samples?
Explain your answer.

9. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using

HPLC for vitamin analysis?

10. Vitamin contents can be presented as units of mg or
μ g, as International Units (IU), or as % DV. Discuss the
differences between these approaches for reporting the
result.

11.4 SUMMARY

The three most used types of methods for the anal-
ysis of vitamins – bioassays and microbiological and
physicochemical assays – have been outlined in this
chapter. They are, in general, applicable to the analy-
sis of more than one vitamin and several food matrices.
However, the analytical procedures must be properly
tailored to the analyte in question and the biologi-
cal matrix to be analyzed; issues concerning sample
preparation, extraction, and quantitative measure-
ments are also involved. It is essential to validate
any new application appropriately by assessing its

11.6 PRACTICE PROBLEMS

1. A 3.21-g tuna sample (packed in water and drained before
sampling) was analyzed for its niacin content. The sam-
ple was digested in 50 ml of 1 N H2SO4. After dissolved
protein was removed by precipitation according to the
AOAC method, a 20-ml aliquot was diluted to 100 ml,
and then a 25-ml aliquot of the intermediate solution
was taken and diluted to 250 ml. The concentration of
niacin in the working solution was determined to be
0.168 μ g/ml. (a) How much niacin is present in the tuna
sample, and (b) how closely does this value compare with

196

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

that provided in the USDA Nutrient Database for Stan-
dard Reference (i.e., ﬁsh, tuna, light, canned in water,
drained solids)?

2. Vitamin C in a nutraceutical formulation was assayed
using the 2,6-dichloroindophenol
titrimetric method.
Determine the concentration of vitamin C (mg/g) in the
nutraceutical based on the data given below from the
assay.
•
• Volume of sample ﬁltrate titrated: 25 ml
• Volume of dye used for the test solution titration:
• Volume of dye used for the test blank titration: 0.1 ml
• mg ascorbic acid equivalents to 1.0 ml of indophenol

Sample weight. 101.7 g, diluted to 500 ml with
HPO3/HOAc solution and ﬁltered

9.2 ml

standard solution: 0.175 mg/ml

Sample weight. 2.0050 g

3. Thiamin in a pet food sample was analyzed using the
AOAC ﬂuorometric method. Based on the assay con-
ditions described below, determine the concentration of
thiamin (μ g/g) in the original pet food sample.
•
• Dilutions. Diluted sample to 100 ml, applied 25 ml
then
for
• Concentration of thiamin·HCl standard working solu-
•

onto the Bio-Rex 70 ion-exchange column,
diluted the eluate to 25 ml and used 5 ml
ﬂuorometry

tion: 0.1 μ g/ml
Fluorometry reading ratio: 0.850

4. Riboﬂavin in raw almonds was analyzed using the
AOAC ﬂuorometric method. Based on the assay condi-
tions described below, (a) determine the concentration of
riboﬂavin (mg/g) in the almonds and (b) how closely this
value compares with that provided in the USDA Nutrient
Database for Standard Reference.
•
• Dilutions: to 50 ml; used 10 ml for ﬂuorometry
•
• Concentration or

Fluorometry readings: B60/X85/C10
1 μ g/ml

riboﬂavin standard solution:

Sample weight: 1.0050 g

5. 1.7 g of a braised, loin pork chop was analyzed for thi-
amin. The sample was digested with 20 ml of 0.1 M HCl
and then diluted to 50 ml. A 40-ml aliquot of the digest
was treated with the enzyme preparation and eventually
diluted to 100 ml. A 45-ml aliquot of the enzyme-treated
ﬁltrate was puriﬁed using a Bio-Rex 70 ion-exchange col-
umn. The analyte from the 45-ml aliquot was applied
to the column and recovered with ﬁve 4.0-ml portions
of hot acid-KCl solution. The portions were pooled in
a 25-ml volumetric ﬂask and diluted to mark. A 5-ml
aliquot as well as appropriate blanks and standard (con-
centration = 1 μ g/ml) were converted to thiochrome and
measured spectroﬂuorometrically. The following results
were found:
•
•

Fluorescent intensity of the oxidized test sample and
blank were 62.8 and 7.3, respectively
Fluorescent intensity of the thiamin·HCl standard and
blank were 60.4 and 5.2, respectively
Determine (a) how many μ g of thiamin are in 5 ml of
the test solution; (b) how many μ g of thiamin/g braised
loin pork chop; (c) how the answer from (b) compares

with that reported in the USDA Nutrient Database for
Standard Reference.

6. A graduate student is analyzing the antioxidant activity
of phenolic compounds in apple juice samples and pur-
chases some apple cider from a Farmer’s market. The stu-
dent worries that the product might have been fortiﬁed
with ascorbic acid, and if so, will mess up his antioxi-
dant assay. So, a vitamin C analysis is conducted by the
2,6-dichloroindophenol titrimetric method. 120 ml of the
apple cider was mixed with 120 ml of the HPO3/HOAc
solution. In triplicate, a 10-ml aliquot of the resultant
solution was taken and titrated against the indophenol
standard solution. The following results were found:
• An average of 13.3 and 0.1 ml of the indophenol stan-
dard was consumed during titration of the test sample
and blank, respectively
From preliminary work it was determined that
0.1518 mg of ascorbic acid was equivalent to 1.0 ml of
indophenol standard solution

•

Determine (a) how many mg of ascorbic acid/ml of apple
cider; (b) how do these results compare to tinned or
bottled fresh apple juice according to the USDA Nutri-
ent Database for Standard Reference; (c) has the apple
cider been fortiﬁed with vitamin C; and (d) can this apple
cider sample be used for the intended antioxidant activity
study?

7. In the 2,6-dichloroindophenol titrimetric method,

the
indophenol reagent is prepared by dissolving 50.0 mg of
2,6-dichloroindophenol sodium salt plus some sodium
bicarbonate in deionized water to 200 ml. The ascor-
bic acid standard solution is prepared by dissolving
50.0 mg of USP ascorbic acid reference standard in 50 ml
of deionized water.
If a 4.5-ml aliquot of the ascor-
bic acid reference standard is treated with 5.0 ml of
the HPO3/HOAc solution and then titrated against the
indophenol reagent, how many milliliters should be
consumed? Note: Remember the stoichiometry for the
reaction.
•
•

FW of
290.08 g/mol
FW of ascorbic acid is 176.12 g/mol

2,6-dichloroindophenol

sodium salt

is

8. A new infant formula was developed for delivery to
a third world country. Unfortunately, the dried infant
formula was stored outdoors for 3 months in the sun-
light before use and there is fear that the vitamin A has
degraded. The reported vitamin A content (expressed as
all-trans retinol equivalents) in the formula at the point
of shipping was 3.0 μ g/g dry formula. The following
test was performed: 140 g of dry formula (i.e., after 3
months of storage outdoors in the sunlight) were dis-
solved in water and made up to 1 L. The AOAC method
was followed with the following observations:
• Peak area for the all-trans-retinol in the standard was
• Weight of oil solution used to prepare the working
• Concentration of all-trans-retinol
in oil standard
• Peak area for the test solution after outdoor storage

retinol standard was 53 mg

solution was 1996 ng/ml

934

was 89

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

197

Determine (a) the concentration (ng/ml) of all-trans-
retinol in the rehydrated infant formula; (b) by what
percentage has the vitamin A content, expressed
as all-trans-retinol,
formula
degraded?

in the dried infant

Calculations:

F = 0.175 mg AA eq./ml indophenol standard
X = 9.2 ml of dye for test solution titration
B = 0.1 ml of dye for test blank titration

mg ascorbic acid/g sample
= (X − B) × (F/E) × (V/Y)

=

(9.2 ml − 0.1 ml) × 0.175 mg/ml

× 500 ml
25 ml
= 0.313 mg of ascorbic acid/g nutraceutical

101.7 g

formulation

3. 0.8479 μ g thiamin/g pet food

Answers
1. (a) 420 μ g in the 3.2-g test portion; (b) there are 13.08 mg
niacin/100 g tuna in the test sample. The USDA Nutrient
Database for Standard Reference lists a value of 13.280 ±
0.711 mg niacin/100 g tuna; so, the values compare well.

Calculations:
(a) Niacin present in tuna sample is . . .

0.168

μ g
ml

× 250 ml
25 ml

× 100 ml
20 ml
= 420 μ g = 0.420 mg niacin

× 50 ml

Calculations:

So,

0.420 mg niacin

3.21 g

= 0.1308 mg/g tuna or 13.08 mg niacin/100 g tuna

(b) The USDA Nutrient Database for Standard Reference
lists a niacin content of 13.28 mg/100 g tuna for “ﬁsh,
tuna, light, canned in water, drained solids.” Thus,
the 13.08 mg niacin/100 g tuna value is very close to
the 13.28 mg value reported in the database.

2. 0.313 mg ascorbic acid/g nutraceutical

Concentration of thiamin·HCl standard = 0.1 μ g/ml

(cid:10)

(cid:9)

Fluorometry reading ratio = 0.850

(I − b)
μ g thiamin/g =
(S − d)
= 0.850 × 0.1 μ g/ml
= 0.8479 μ g thiamin/g pet food

× C
A
× 25
25 ml

5 ml

(cid:9)

(cid:10)

(I − b)
(S − d)
× Vo
WT

× 25
Vp

× 100 ml
2.0050 g

4. (a) 9.95 × 10

−3 mg riboﬂavin/g raw almonds; (b) there is
0.995 mg riboﬂavin/100 g raw almonds in the test sample.
The USDA Nutrient Database for Standard Reference lists
a value of 1.014± 0.025 mg riboﬂavin/100 g raw almonds;
so, the values compare well.

198

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

(cid:10)

Calculations:
(cid:9)
(a) mg of riboﬂavin/g raw almonds
(cid:9)

× DF
WT

× CS
(cid:10)
V
× 0.001 mg/ml

=

(B − C)
(X − B)
(60 − 10)
(85 − 60)
=
= 9.95 × 10

10 ml

× 50 ml
1.0050 g

−3 mg of riboﬂavin/g raw almonds

(b) The USDA Nutrient Database for Standard Reference
lists a riboﬂavin content of 1.014 ± 0.025 mg/100 g
for “nuts, almonds.” Thus, the 9.95 × 10
−3 mg of
riboﬂavin/g raw almonds is very close to the value
reported in the database.

5. (a) 1.005 μ g in 5 ml; (b) 8.214 μ g/g; (c) very close, as
each 100 g of braised, pork loin chop contains 0.822 mg
of thiamin.

Calculations:
(a) μ g of thiamin in 5 ml of test solution
(62.8 − 7.3)
(60.4 − 5.2)

(I − b)
(S − d)

(cid:9)

(cid:10)

=

=

= 55.5
55.2

(b) μ g of thiamin/g braised pork chops

=

(cid:10)

× 25
Vp

× Vo
WT

= 1.005 μ g thiamin/5 ml
(cid:9)
(cid:9)

(I − b)
× C
(S − d)
(cid:10)
A
(62.8 − 7.3)
(60.4 − 5.2)
×50 ml × 100 ml
40 ml
= 8.214 μ g/g braised pork chop

× 1 μ g/ml
5 ml

/1.7 g

=

× 25 ml
45 ml

(c) The USDA Nutrient Database for Standard Reference
lists a thiamin content of 0.822 mg/100 g for “pork,
fresh loin, center loin (chops), bone-in, separable lean
only, cooked, braised.” Thus, the 8.214 μ g thiamin/g
braised pork chops is very close to the value reported
in the database.

6. (a) 0.401 mg ascorbic acid/ml; (b) tinned or bottled juice
contains 38.5 mg/100 g juice, so the results are similar; (c)
Yes. The cider has been fortiﬁed with vitamin C; and (d)
No. The high content of vitamin C will likely sacriﬁce
itself as the antioxidant in the antioxidant activity assay
before any endogenous phenolic compounds in the cider
do so.

Calculations:
(a) mg of ascorbic acid (AA)/ml apple cider

= (X − B) × F
× V
Y
E
= (13.3 ml − 0.1 ml)
× 0.1518 mg AA eq./1.0 ml indophenol std. solution

120 ml

× 240 ml
10 ml

= 0.401 mgAA/ml apple cider

(b) According to the USDA Nutrient Database for Stan-
dard Reference, “apple juice, canned or bottled,
unsweetened, with added ascorbic acid” contains
38.5 mg ascorbic acid/100 g apple juice; so, the results
are similar.

(c) Yes. The cider has been fortiﬁed with vitamin C.
(d) No. The high content of vitamin C will likely sacri-
ﬁce itself as the antioxidant in the antioxidant assay
before any endogenous phenolic compounds in the
cider do so.

7. 29.6 ml

Calculations:
Formula Weight: 2,6-dichloroindophenol sodium salt

= 290.08 g/mol

Formula Weight: ascorbic acid = 176.12 g/mol

moles (mol) =

mass (g)

formula weight (g/mol)

mol =

0.25 g

290.08 g/mol

So, concentration of 2,6-dichloroindophenol sodium salt
solution is = 8.618 × 10
mol = g

−4 mol/L

; mol =

1 g

g/mol

176.12 g/mol

Chapter 11 • Vitamin Analysis

199

concentration of ascorbic acid stock solution

So,
= 5.678 × 10

−3 mol/L

Calculations:
(a) all-trans-retinol (ng/ml rehydrated formula)

× Wt × Ct × DF
× 53 mg × 1996 ng/ml × 5
360

= At
Ast
= 89
934
= 140 ng all-trans-retinol/ml rehydrated milk

mula

(b) Originally there was 3 μ g all-trans retinol/g dry for-
So, in 140 g of formula → 420 μ g all-trans-retinol → in
1 L → 420 ng/ml

420 ng/ml × x= 140 ng/ml
X = 0.333 or 1/3

Therefore, the vitamin A content, expressed as all-
trans-retinol, had degraded by 66.7% or 2/3.

In the reaction vessel, there is:

11.7 REFERENCES

5.678 × 10
= 2.555 × 10

−3 mmol/ml × 4.5 ml

−2 mmol ascorbic acid

The reaction stoichiometry is 1:1. See Fig. 11-8 for
the chemical reaction. So, 2.555 × 10
−2 mmol of 2,6-
dichloroindophenol reagent need to be consumed.

−4mmol/ml× X ml = 2.555× 10

8.618× 10
x = 29.6 ml

−2mmol

8. (a) 140 ng all-trans-retinol/ml; and (b) 66.7%, or 2/3.

1. Eitenmiller RR, Ye L, Landen WO, Jr (2008) Vitamin anal-
ysis for the health and food sciences, 2nd edn., p. 135.
Taylor & Francis Group, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL

2. AOAC International (2007) Ofﬁcial methods of analy-
sis, 18th ed., 2005; Current through revision 2, 2007
(On-line). AOAC International, Gaithersburg, MD

3. European Committee for Standardization, Technical
Committee CEN/TC 275 (2000) Foodstuffs – determi-
nation of Vitamin A by high performance liquid chro-
matography – Part 1: measurement of all-trans-Retinol
and 13-cis-Retinol, EN 12823-1

4. European Committee for Standardization, Technical
Committee CEN/TC 275 (2000) Foodstuffs – determi-
nation of Vitamin A by high performance liquid chro-
matography – Part 2: measurement of β-Carotene, EN
12823-2

5. European Committee for Standardization, Technical
Committee CEN/TC 275 (2000) Foodstuffs – determi-
nation of Vitamin D by high performance liquid chro-
matography – measurement of cholecalciferol (D3) and
ergocalciferol (D2), EN 12821

6. European Committee for Standardization, Technical
Committee CEN/TC 275 (2000) Foodstuffs – deter-
mination of Vitamin E by high performance liquid
chromatography – measurement of α-, β-, γ- and δ-
Tocopherols, EN 12822

7. European Committee for Standardization, Technical
Committee CEN/TC 275 (2003) Foodstuffs – determina-
tion of Vitamin K by HPLC, EN 14148

8. European Committee for Standardization, Technical
Committee CEN/TC 275 (2003) Foodstuffs – determina-
tion of Vitamin C by HPLC, EN 14130

9. European Committee for Standardization, Technical
Committee CEN/TC 275 (2003) Foodstuffs – determina-
tion of Vitamin B1 by HPLC, EN 14122

200

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

10. European Committee for Standardization, Technical
Committee CEN/TC 275 (2003) Foodstuffs – determina-
tion of Vitamin B2 by HPLC, EN 14152

11. United States Pharmacopeial Convention (2005) US
Pharmacopoeia National Formulary, USP29/NF24,
Nutritional Supplements, Ofﬁcial Monographs, United
States Pharmacopoeial Convention, Rockville, MD

12. Ball GFM (2006) Vitamins in foods. Analysis, bioavail-
ability, and stability. Taylor & Francis Group, CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL.

13. Blake CJ (2007) Analytical procedures for water-soluble
vitamins in foods and dietary supplements: a review.
Anal Bioanal Chem 389:63–76

14. Eitenmiller RR, De Souza S (1985) Niacin. In: Augustin J,
Klein BP, Becker DA, Venugopal PB (eds) Methods of
vitamin assay, 4th edn. Wiley, New York, pp 685–397.

15. De Souza S, Eitenmiller RR (1990) Effects of different
enzyme treatments on extraction of total folate from var-
ious foods prior to microbiological assay and radioassay.
J Micronutrient Anal 7:37–57.

16. Tamura T (1990) Microbiological assay of folates. In:
Picciano MF, Stokstad ELR, Gregory JF III (eds) Folic

acid metabolism in health and disease, contemporary
issues in clinical nutrition, Vol. 13. Wiley-Liss, New York,
pp 121–137

17. Institute of Medicine (2000) Dietary reference intakes for
vitamin c, vitamin e, selenium and carotenoids. National
Academy Press, Washington, DC

18. Lee J, Ye L, Landen WO Jr, Eitenmiller RR (2000) Opti-
mization of an extraction procedure for the quantiﬁca-
tion of Vitamin E in tomato and broccoli using response
surface methodology. J Food Compos Anal 13:45–57

19. Pelletier O (1985) Vitamin C (L-ascorbic and dehydro-
L-ascorbic acid). In: Augustin J, Klein BP, Becker DA,
Venugopal PB (eds) Methods of vitamin assay, 4th edn.
Wiley, New York, pp 335–336

20. Pelletier O (1985) Vitamin C (L-ascorbic and dehydro-
L-ascorbic acid). In: Augustin J, Klein BP, Becker DA,
Venugopal PB (eds) Methods of vitamin assay, 4th edn.
Wiley, New York, pp 338–341

21. AACC International (2010) Approved methods of anal-
(On-line), AACC International, St.

ysis, 11th edn.
Paul, MN

12

c h a p t e r

Traditional Methods for Mineral
Analysis

RobertE.Ward∗ andCharlesE.Carpenter

DepartmentofNutritionandFoodSciences,UtahStateUniversity,
Logan,UT84322-8700,USA
robert.ward@usu.edu
chuck.carpenter@usu.edu

12.1 Introduction 203

12.3 Methods 205

12.1.1 Importance of Minerals in the Diet 203
12.1.2 Minerals in Food Processing 203

12.2 Basic Considerations 204

12.2.1 Nature of Analyses 204
12.2.2 Sample Preparation 204
12.2.3 Interferences 205

12.3.1 EDTA Complexometric Titration 205

12.3.1.1 Principles 205
12.3.1.2 Procedure: Hardness of Water

Using EDTA Titration 205

12.3.1.3 Applications 206

S.S. Nielsen, Food Analysis, Food Science Texts Series, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-1478-1_12,
c(cid:2) Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2010

201

202

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

12.3.2 Precipitation Titration 206

12.3.2.1 Principles 206
12.3.2.2 Procedures 207

12.3.2.2.1 Mohr Titration of Salt

in Butter (AOAC
Method
960.29) 207

12.3.2.2.2 Volhard Titration of

Chloride in Plant
Material (AOAC
Method
915.01) 207

12.3.2.3 Applications 207
12.3.3 Colorimetric Methods 208

12.3.3.1 Principles 208

12.3.3.2 Procedures: Colorimetric

Determination of Iron
in Meat 209

12.3.3.3 Applications 209

12.3.4 Ion-Selective Electrodes 209

12.3.4.1 Principles 209
12.3.4.2 General Methodology 210
12.3.4.3 Electrode Calibration

and Determination
of Concentration 211

12.3.4.4 Applications 211

12.4 Comparison of Methods 212
12.5 Summary 212
12.6 Study Questions 212
12.7 Practice Problems 213
12.8 References 214

Chapter 12 • Traditional Methods for Mineral Analysis

203

12.1 INTRODUCTION

This chapter describes traditional methods for analy-
sis of minerals involving titrimetric and colorimetric
procedures, and the use of ion selective electrodes.
Other traditional methods of mineral analysis include
gravimetric titration (i.e., insoluble forms of minerals
are precipitated, rinse, dried, and weighed) and redox
reactions (i.e., mineral is part of an oxidation–reduction
reaction, and product is quantitated). However, these
latter two methods will not be covered because they
currently are used little in the food industry. The tradi-
tional methods that will be described have maintained
widespread usage in the food industry despite the
development of more modern instrumentation such as
atomic absorption spectroscopy and inductively cou-
pled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (Chap. 24).
Traditional methods generally require chemicals and
equipment that are routinely available in an analyti-
cal laboratory and are within the experience of most
laboratory technicians. Additionally, traditional meth-
ods often form the basis for rapid analysis kits (e.g.,
Quantab R(cid:2)
for salt determination) that are increas-
ingly in demand. Procedures for analysis of minerals
of major nutritional or food processing concern are
used for illustrative purposes. For additional examples
of traditional methods refer to references (1–6). Slight
modiﬁcations of these traditional methods are often
needed for speciﬁc foodstuffs to minimize interferences
or to be in the range of analytical performance. For ana-
lytical requirements for speciﬁc foods see the Ofﬁcial
Methods of Analysis of AOAC International (5) and
related ofﬁcial methods (6).

12.1.1 Importance of Minerals in the Diet
Calcium, phosphorus, sodium, potassium, magne-
sium, chlorine, and sulfur make up the dietary
macro minerals, those minerals required at more than
100 mg/day by the adult (7–9). An additional ten min-
erals are required in milli- or microgram quantities
per day and are referred to as trace minerals. These
include iron, iodine, zinc, copper, chromium, man-
ganese, molybdenum, ﬂuoride, selenium, and silica.
There is also a group of minerals called ultra trace
minerals,
including vanadium, tin, nickel, arsenic,
and boron, that are being investigated for possible bio-
logical function, but that currently do not have clearly
deﬁned biochemical roles. Some mineral elements
have been documented to be toxic to the body and
should, therefore, be avoided in the diet. These include
lead, mercury, cadmium, and aluminum. Essential
minerals such as ﬂuoride and selenium also are known
to be harmful if consumed in excessive quantities,
even though they do have beneﬁcial biochemical func-
tions at proper dietary levels.

The Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990
(NLEA) mandated labeling of sodium,
iron, and
calcium contents largely because of their important
roles in controlling hypertension, preventing ane-
mia, and impeding the development of osteoporosis,
respectively (see Fig. 3-1, Chap. 3). The content of
these minerals in several foods is shown in Table 12-1.
The content of other minerals may be included on the
label at the producer’s option, although this becomes
mandatory if the mineral is the subject of a nutrient
claim on the label. Implementation of the NLEA has
led to an increased need for more rapid and accurate
analysis of minerals and other food components.

12.1.2 Minerals in Food Processing
Minerals are of nutritional and functional impor-
tance, and for that reason their levels need to be known
and/or controlled. Some minerals are contained at
high levels in natural foodstuffs. For example, milk
is a good source of calcium, containing about 300 mg
of calcium per 8-ounce cup. However, direct acid cot-
tage cheese is very low in calcium because of the action
of the acid causing the calcium bound to the casein
to be freed and consequently lost in the whey frac-
tion. Similarly, a large portion of the phosphorus, zinc,
manganese, chromium, and copper found in a grain
kernel is lost when the bran layer is removed in pro-
cessing. The enrichment law for ﬂour requires that
iron be replaced in white ﬂour to the level at which it
occurred naturally in the wheat kernel before removal
of the bran.

Fortiﬁcation of some foods has allowed addition
of minerals above levels ever expected naturally. Pre-
pared breakfast cereals often are fortiﬁed with miner-
als such as calcium, iron, and zinc, formerly thought to
be limited in the diet. Fortiﬁcation of salt with iodine
has almost eliminated goiter in the USA. In other cases,
minerals may be added for functionality. Salt is added
for ﬂavor, to modify ionic strength that effects solubi-
lization of protein and other food components, and as
a preservative. This increases signiﬁcantly the sodium
content of products such as processed meats, pickles,
and processed cheese. Phosphorus may be added as
phosphates to increase water-holding capacity. Cal-
cium may be added to promote gelation of proteins
and gums.

Water is an integral part of food processing, and
water quality is a major factor to be considered in the
food processing industry. Water is used for washing,
rinsing, blanching, cooling, and as an ingredient in
formulations. Microbiological safety of water used in
food processing is very important. Also important, but
generally not appreciated by the consuming public, is
the mineral content of water used in food processing.

204

12-1
table

FoodItem

Mineral Content of Selected Foods

mg/g(WetWeightBasis)
Calcium Iron Sodium

Cereals, bread, and pasta

Rice, brown, long-grain, raw

Corn ﬂakes, plain

White rice, long-grain, regular,

real, enriched

Wheat ﬂour, whole-grain
Wheat ﬂour, white,

all-purpose, unenriched

Macaroni, dry, enriched
Rye bread

Dairy products

Milk, whole, ﬂuid, 3.3% fat
Evaporated milk, whole
Butter, with salt
Cream, ﬂuid, half and half
Cheese, cottage, low fat,

2% milk fat

Yogurt, plain, low fat
Fruits and vegetables

Apples, raw, with skin
Bananas, raw
Cherries, sweet, raw
Raisins, seedless
Potatoes, raw, skin
Tomatoes, red, ripe, raw

Meats, poultry, and ﬁsh

Eggs, whole, raw, fresh
Fish ﬁllet, battered or breaded,

and fried

raw

Pork, fresh, leg (ham), whole,

Bologna, chicken, pork, beef
Chicken, broilers or fryers,

breast meat only, raw

Beef, chuck, arm pot roast, raw

23
3
28

34
15

21
73

110
260
24
110
91

200

6
5
13
50
30
10

53
18

5

92
11

16

2
19
4

4
1

3
3

<1
<1
<1
<1
<1

<1

<1
<1
<1
2
3
<1

2
2

<1

1
<1

2

7
950
5

5
2

6
660

40
110
580
41
330

77

1
1
<1
11
10
5

40
530

47

1,100
65

74

From US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service
(2009) USDA National Nutrient Database for Standard Reference.
Release 22. Nutrient Data Laboratory Home Page, http://www.
ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl

Waters that contain excessive minerals can result in
clouding of beverages. Textural properties of fruits
and vegetables can be inﬂuenced by the “hardness”
or “softness” of the water used during processing.

12.2 BASIC CONSIDERATIONS

12.2.1 Nature of Analyses
Mineral analysis is a valuable model for understand-
ing the basic structure of analysis procedures to
separate and measure. Separation of minerals from the
food matrix is often speciﬁc, such as complexometric
titrations (Sect. 12.3.1) or precipitation titrations

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

In other cases,

In these cases of speciﬁc separation,
(Sect. 12.3.2).
nonspeciﬁc measurements such as volume of titrant
are made and are later converted to mass of
mineral based on fundamental stoichiometric rela-
tionships.
separation of mineral
involves nonspeciﬁc procedures such as ashing or
acid extraction. These nonspeciﬁc separations require
that a speciﬁc measurement be made as provided
by colorimetry (Sect. 12.3.3), ion-selective electrodes
(ISE) (Sect. 12.3.4), atomic absorption spectroscopy, or
inductively
emission
spectroscopy (Chap. 24).

plasma-atomic

coupled

Because determination of mass of mineral is the
ﬁnal objective of analysis, measures other than mass
are considered to be surrogate, or stand-in, measures.
Surrogate measures are converted into mass of min-
eral via fundamental stoichiometric and physiochemi-
cal relationships or by empirical relationships. Empir-
ical relationships are those associations that need to
be established by experimentation because they do
not follow any well-established physiochemical rela-
tionship. An example of a surrogate measurement
is the absorbance of a chromogen–mineral complex
(Sect. 12.3.3). It may be possible to convert absorbance
into mass of mineral using the fundamental relation-
ships deﬁned by the molar absorptivity and stoichiom-
etry of the chromogen–mineral complex. However, it
is more commonly required that the absorbance: con-
centration relationship be empirically developed using
a series of standards (i.e., a standard curve).

12.2.2 Sample Preparation
Some sample preparation is generally required for
traditional methods of mineral analysis to ensure a
well-mixed and representative sample and to make
the sample ready for the procedure to follow. A major
concern in mineral analysis is contamination dur-
ing sample preparation. Comminution (e.g., grinding
or chopping) and mixing using metallic instruments
can add signiﬁcant mineral to samples and, when-
ever possible, should be performed using nonmetallic
instruments or instruments not composed of the sam-
ple mineral. For example, it is standard practice in
our laboratories to use an aluminum grinder for com-
minution of meat samples undergoing iron analysis.
Glassware used in sample preparation and analysis
should be scrupulously cleaned using acid washes
and triple rinsed in the purest water. The latter may
necessitate installation of an ultrapure water system
in the laboratory to further purify the general supply
of distilled water.

Solvents,

including water, can contain signiﬁ-
cant quantities of minerals. Therefore, all procedures
involving mineral analysis require the use of the

Chapter 12 • Traditional Methods for Mineral Analysis

205

purest reagents available. In some cases, the cost of
ultrapure reagents may be prohibitive. When this is
the case, the alternative is to always work with a
reagent blank. A reagent blank is a sample of reagents
used in the sample analysis, quantitatively the same as
that used in the sample but without any of the mate-
rial being analyzed. This reagent blank, representing
the sum of the mineral contamination in the reagents,
is then subtracted from the sample values to more
accurately quantify the mineral.

A method such as near-infrared spectroscopy
(Chap. 23) allows for mineral estimation without
destruction of the carbon matrix of carbohydrates, fats,
protein, and vitamins that make up foods. However,
traditional methods generally require that the miner-
als be freed from this organic matrix in some manner.
Chapter 7 describes the various methods used to ash
foods in preparation for determination of speciﬁc min-
eral components of the food. In water samples, miner-
als may be determined without further preparation.

12.2.3 Interferences
Factors such as pH, sample matrix, temperature, and
other analytical conditions and reagents can interfere
with the ability of an analytical method to quantify a
mineral. Often there are speciﬁc interfering substances
that must be removed or suppressed for accurate anal-
ysis. Two of the more common approaches are to
isolate the sample mineral, or remove interfering min-
erals, using selective precipitations or ion exchange
resins. Water may need to be boiled to remove carbon-
ates that interfere with several traditional methods of
mineral analysis.

If other interferences are suspected, it is a common
practice to develop the standard curve using sample
mineral dissolved in a background matrix containing
interfering elements known to be in the food sam-
ple. For example, if a food sample is to be analyzed
for calcium content, a background matrix solution
of the known levels of sodium, potassium, magne-
sium, and phosphorus should be used to prepare the
calcium standards for developing the standard curve.
In this manner, the standard curve more closely rep-
resents the analysis response to the sample mineral
when analyzing a food sample. Alternatively, the stan-
dard curve can be developed using a series of sample
mineral spikes added to the food sample. A spike
is a small volume of a concentrated standard that is
added to the sample. The volume is small enough so
as to not appreciably change the overall composition
of the sample, except for the mineral of interest. Thus,
measurements of both the standards and the sample
are made in the presence of the same background.
If the spikes are added before implementation of the

analysis protocol, possible effects of incomplete extrac-
tions, sample mineral degradation, and other losses
are integrated into the standard curve.

12.3 METHODS

12.3.1 EDTA Complexometric Titration
12.3.1.1 Principles
The hexadentate ligand ethylenediaminetetraacetate
(EDTA) forms stable 1:1 complexes with numerous
mineral
ions. This gives complexometric titration
using EDTA broad application in mineral analysis. Sta-
bility of mineral–EDTA complexes generally increases
with valence of the ion, although there is signiﬁcant
variation among ions of similar valence due to their
coordination chemistry. The complexation equilibrium
is strongly pH dependent. With decreasing pH the
chelating sites of EDTA become protonated, thereby
decreasing its effective concentration. Endpoints are
detected using mineral chelators that have coordina-
tion constants lower than EDTA (i.e., less afﬁnity for
mineral ions) and that produce different colors in each
of their complexed and free states. Calmagite and
Eriochrome Black T (EBT) are such indicators that
change from blue to pink when they complex with
calcium or magnesium. The endpoint of a complexo-
metric EDTA titration using either Calmagite or EBT
as the indicator is detected as the color changes from
pink to blue.

The pH affects a complexometric EDTA titration
in several ways and must be controlled for best per-
formance. The pH must be 10 or more for calcium
or magnesium to form stable complexes with EDTA.
Also, the sharpness of the endpoint increases with
increasing pH. However, magnesium and calcium pre-
cipitate as their hydroxides at pH 12, and titration pH
should probably be no more than 11 to ensure their sol-
ubility. Considering all factors, EDTA complexometric
titration of calcium and magnesium is speciﬁed at pH
10 ± 0.1 using an ammonia buffer (10).

12.3.1.2 Procedure:HardnessofWaterUsing
EDTATitration
Water hardness is determined by EDTA complexomet-
ric titration of the total of calcium and magnesium,
in the presence of Calmagite, and expressed as the
equivalents of calcium carbonate (mg/L) (Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,
Method 2340, Hardness) (10) (Fig. 12-1). The calcium–
Calmagite complex is not stable, and calcium alone
cannot be titrated using the Calmagite indicator. How-
ever, Calmagite becomes an effective indicator for

206

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

WATER HARDNESS-EDTA TITRATION

Titration of Water Sample

Dilute 25 ml sample (or such volume to require <15 ml titrant) to 50 ml in a ﬂask.

Bring pH to 10±0.1 by adding 1–2 ml buffer solution (NH4 in NH4OH, combined with Na2EDTA

and MgSO4 or MgCl2) and 1–2 drops Calmagite indicator solution.

Titrate with a standard solution of ca. 0.01 M EDTA to a blue endpoint.

Standardization of EDTA

Weigh 1.000 mg CaCO3 into a 500-ml Erlenmeyer ﬂask and add HCl (1 : 1 dilution with water)

until dissolved. Add 200 ml H2O and boil a few minutes to expel CO2. Let cool.

Add a few drops of methyl red indicator and adjust to intermediate orange color with 3 N NH4OH or

HCl (1 : 1) as required. Transfer to 1 L ﬂask and dilute to volume.

Titrate calcium standard solution with EDTA solution, to Calmagite endpoint.

⇓

⇓

⇓

⇓
⇓

Determine CaCO3 equivalents as mg CaCO3/ml EDTA solution.

Calculations

Hardness (EDTA) as mg CaCO3/L = (mg CaCO3/ml EDTA x ml EDTA)/L sample

12-1
f i g u r e

Procedure for determination of water hardness by EDTA titration. Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, Method 2340, Hardness. [Adapted from (10).]

calcium titration if we include in the buffer solution a
small amount of neutral magnesium salt and enough
EDTA to bind all magnesium. Upon mixing sample
into the buffer solution, calcium in the sample replaces
the magnesium bound to EDTA. The free magne-
sium binds to Calmagite, and the pink magnesium–
Calmagite complex persists until all calcium in the
sample has been titrated with EDTA. The ﬁrst excess
of EDTA removes magnesium from Calmagite and
produces a blue endpoint.

12.3.1.3 Applications
The major application of EDTA complexometric titra-
tion is testing calcium plus magnesium as an indicator
of water hardness (10). However, EDTA complexomet-
ric titration is suitable for determining calcium in the
ash of fruits and vegetables (AOAC Method 968.31) (5)
and other foods that have calcium without appreciable
magnesium or phosphorus. The water hardness appli-
cation of the EDTA complexometric titration is made
easy using test strips impregnated with Calmagite and
EDTA (e.g., AquaChek, Environmental Test Systems,
Inc., a HACH Company, Elkhart, IN). The strips are
dipped into the water to test for total hardness caused
by calcium and magnesium. The calcium displaces the
magnesium bound to EDTA, and the released mag-
nesium binds to Calmagite, causing the test strip to
change color.

12.3.2 Precipitation Titration
12.3.2.1 Principles
When at least one product of a titration reaction is
an insoluble precipitate, it is referred to as precipita-
tion titrimetry. Few of the many gravimetric methods,
however, can be adapted to yield accurate volumetric
methods. Some of the major factors blocking the adap-
tation are long times necessary for complete precipita-
tion, failure of the reaction to yield a single product of
deﬁnite composition, and lack of an endpoint indicator
for the reaction.

Nonetheless, precipitation titration has resulted
in at least two methods that are used widely in the
food industry today. The Mohr method for chloride
determination is a direct or forward titration method,
based on the formation of an orange-colored solid,
silver chromate, after silver from silver nitrate has
complexed with all the available chloride.

− → AgCl (until all Cl

−

is complexed) [1]

Ag+ + Cl
2Ag+ + CrO2−

4

→ Ag2CrO4

(orange only after
Cl

is all complexed)

−

[2]

The Volhard method is an indirect or back-titration
method in which an excess of a standard solution of
silver nitrate is added to a chloride-containing sample
solution. The excess silver is then back-titrated using

Chapter 12 • Traditional Methods for Mineral Analysis

207

a standardized solution of potassium or ammonium
thiocyanate with ferric ion as an indicator. The amount
of silver that is precipitated with chloride in the sam-
ple solution is calculated by subtracting the excess
silver from the original silver content.

− → AgCl (until all Cl

−

is complexed)

[3]

Ag+ + Cl
Ag+ + SCN

− → AgSCN

(to quantitate silver not
complexed with chloride)

SCN

− + Fe3 → FeSCN
−

(red when there is any
SCN

not complexed to Ag+)

[4]

[5]

12.3.2.2 Procedures
12.3.2.2.1 Mohr Titration of Salt in Butter (AOAC
Method 960.29) Salt in foods may be estimated by
titrating the chloride ion with silver (Fig. 12-2). The
orange endpoint in this reaction occurs only when all
chloride ion is complexed, resulting in an excess of sil-
ver to form the colored silver chromate. The endpoint
of this reaction is therefore at the ﬁrst hint of an orange
color. When preparing reagents for this assay, use

boiled water to avoid interferences from carbonates in
the water.

12.3.2.2.2 VolhardTitrationofChlorideinPlantMate-
rial (AOAC Method 915.01) In the Volhard method
(Fig. 12-3), water must be boiled to minimize errors
due to interfering carbonates, because the solubility
product of silver carbonate is much less than the sol-
ubility product of silver chloride. Once chloride is
determined by titration, the chloride weight is multi-
plied by 1.648 to obtain salt weight, if salt content is
desired.

12.3.2.3 Applications
Precipitation titration methods are well suited for any
foods that may be high in chlorides. Because of added
salt in processed cheeses and meats, these products
should certainly be considered for using this method
to detect chloride; then salt content is estimated by cal-
culation. Precipitation titrations are easily automated,
thus ensuring that these traditional methods will see
continued use in the analytical food laboratory. For
example, the automatic titration system commonly
used to rapidly measure the salt content of potato

SALT — MOHR TITRATION

Titration of Butter Sample

Weigh about 5 g of butter into 250-ml Erlenmeyer ﬂask and add 100 ml of boiling H2O.

Let stand 5–10 min with occasional swirling.

Add 2 ml of a 5% solution of K2CrO4 in d H2O.

Titrate with 0.1 N AgNO3 standardized as below until an orange-brown color persists for 30 sec.

Accurately weigh 300 mg of recrystallized dried KCl and transfer to a 250-ml Erlenmeyer ﬂask

Standardization of 0.1 N AgNO3

with 40 ml of water.

⇓

Add 1 ml of K2CrO4 solution and titrate with AgNO3 solution until ﬁrst perceptible pale

red-brown appears.

From the titration volume subtract the milliliters of the AgNO3 solution required to produce the

endpoint color in 75 ml of water containing 1 ml of K2CaO4.

⇓
⇓
⇓

⇓

⇓

From the next volume of AgNO3 calculate normality of the AgNO3 as:

Normality AgNO3 =

mg KCl

ml AgNO3 × 74.555 g KCl/mole

Calculating Salt in Butter
Percent salt = ml 0.1 N AgNO3
g of sample

× 0.585

[0.585 = (58.5 g NaCl/mol)/100]

Procedure of Mohr titration of salt in butter. AOAC Method 960.29 [Adapted from (5)].

12-2
f i g u r e

208

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

SALT — VOLHARD TITRATION

Titration of Sample

Moisten 5 g of sample in crucible with 20 ml of 5% Na2 CO3 in water.

Char on a hot plate under a hood until smoking stops.

Evaporate to dryness.

◦

C for 24 hr.

⇓
⇓
⇓
Combust at 500
⇓
⇓
⇓

Dissolve residue in 10 ml of 5 N HNO3.

Dilute to 25 ml with d H2O.

Titrate with standardized AgNO3 solution (from the Mohr method) until white AgCl stops

precipitating and then add a slight excess.

Stir well, ﬁlter through a retentive ﬁlter paper, and wash AgCl thoroughly.

Add 5 ml of a saturated solution of FeNH4(SO4)2 • 12H2O to the combined titrate and washings.

Add 3 ml of 12 N HNO3 and titrate excess silver with 0.1 N potassium thiocyanate.

Standardization of Potassium Thiocyanate Standard Solution

Determine working titer of the 0.1 N potassium thiocyanate standard solution by accurately
measuring 40–50 ml of the standard AgNO3 and adding it to 2 ml of FeNH4(SO4)2 · 12H2O

indicator solution and 5 ml of 9 N HNO3.

⇓
⇓
⇓

⇓

Titrate with thiocyanate solution until solution appears pale rose after vigorous shaking.

Net volume of the AgNO3 = Total volume AgNO3 added – Volume titrated with thiocyanate

1 ml of 0.1 M AgNO3 = 3.506 mg chloride

Calculating Cl Concentration

Procedure for Volhard titration of chloride in plant material. AOAC Method 915.01. [Adapted from (5).]

12-3
f i g u r e

the
chips is simply doing a Mohr titration. Also,
Quantab R(cid:2)
chloride titration used in AOAC Method
971.19 is an adaptation of the principles involved in
the Mohr titration method. This test strip adaptation
allows for very rapid quantitation of salt in food prod-
ucts and is accurate to ±10% over a range of 0.3–10%
NaCl in food products.

12.3.3 Colorimetric Methods
12.3.3.1 Principles
Chromogens are chemicals that, upon reaction with
the compound of interest, form a colored product.
Chromogens are available that selectively react with
a wide variety of minerals. Each chromogen reacts
with its corresponding mineral to produce a soluble
colored product that can be quantiﬁed by absorp-
tion of light at a speciﬁed wavelength. The relation-
ship between concentration and absorbance is given
by Beer’s law as detailed in Chap. 22. Generally,

concentration of mineral in a sample is determined
from a standard curve developed during the analysis,
although in some cases it is possible to directly calcu-
late concentration based on molar absorptivity of the
chromogen–mineral complex.

Samples generally must be ashed or treated in
some other manner to isolate and/or release the min-
erals from organic complexes that would otherwise
inhibit their reactivity with the chromogen. The min-
eral of interest must be solubilized from a dry ash
and subsequently handled in a manner that prevents
its precipitation. The soluble mineral may need to be
treated (e.g., reduced or oxidized) to ensure that all
mineral is in a form that reacts with the chromogen (2).
Ideally, the chromogen reacts rapidly to produce a sta-
ble product. This is not always the case in practice, and
time constraints may be established for color develop-
ment and reading of absorbance. As with all mineral
analysis of food, special efforts must be put in place to
avoid contamination during sampling and analysis.

Chapter 12 • Traditional Methods for Mineral Analysis

209

12.3.3.2 Procedures:Colorimetric
DeterminationofIroninMeat
The total
iron content of foods can be quantiﬁed
spectrophotometrically as shown in Fig. 12-4. In this
method, the absorption of light at 562 nm is converted
to iron concentration in the sample via a regression
equation generated from a standard curve developed
during the analysis using a standard solution. In meat
systems, this method has been coupled with a method
speciﬁc for heme iron to determine the ratio of heme
iron to total iron, which is important nutritionally as
the former is more bioavailable (11). Another inter-
esting aspect of this method of interest to the food
scientist is the fact that the ferrozine reagent only
reacts with ferrous iron, and not ferric. The addition
of ascorbic acid in the second to last step is neces-
sary to convert all ionic iron to the detectable fer-
rous form. Repeating the procedure with and without
ascorbic acid allows determination of total and fer-
rous ionic iron, respectively. Ferric iron is calculated
by difference.

12.3.3.3 Applications
Colorimetry is used for the detection and quantiﬁca-
tion of a wide variety of minerals in food, and it is
often a viable alternative to atomic absorption spec-
troscopy and other mineral detection methods. Colori-
metric methods generally are very speciﬁc and usually
can be performed in the presence of other minerals,
thereby avoiding extensive separation to isolate the
mineral of interest. They are particularly robust and

often immune to matrix effects that can limit the use-
fulness of other methods for mineral analysis. With
minimal effort and expense, many colorimetric meth-
ods will perform with precision and accuracy simi-
lar to that obtained by experienced personnel using
atomic absorption spectroscopy (11).

12.3.4 Ion-Selective Electrodes
12.3.4.1 Principles
Many electrodes have been developed for the selec-
tive measurement of various cations and anions,
such as bromide, calcium, chloride, ﬂuoride, potas-
sium, sodium, and sulﬁde (12, 13). The pH electrode
described in Chap. 13 is a speciﬁc example of an ISE.
For any ISE, an ion-selective sensor is placed such
that it acts as a “bridging electrode” between two
reference electrodes carefully designed to produce a
constant and reproducible potential. The sensor can
take on many forms (e.g., glass, single crystal, pre-
cipitate based, solvent polymer), although each pro-
vides an ion-selective electronic coupling that allows a
potential to develop across the sensor. The exact mech-
anism(s) of charge transport across the sensor is not
completely understood, but it is brought about by ion-
selective species incorporated within the sensor itself
and has been described by analogy to the response of
billiard balls to an impact. If the ion-selective species
within the sensor are imagined to be a row of billiard
balls, it can be envisioned how the impact of sam-
ple ions on one sensor surface is translocated to the
other surface. In this manner, the potential within the

IRON DETERMINATION OF MEAT—COLORIMETRIC ASSAY

Prepare solutions of 10, 8, 6, 4, 2 μ g iron/ml from a stock solution of 10 μ g iron/ml.

Make dilutions using 0.1 N HCl.

Preparation of Standards

Place ∼5 g sample into crucible and accurately weigh.

Analysis of Sample

Heat on hot plate until well charred and sample has stopped smoking.

◦

C until ash is white.

Dissolve ash in small amount 1 N HCl and dilute to 50 ml volume with 0.1 N HCl

Transfer 0.500 ml of diluted sample and standards into 10 ml test tubes.

Add 1.250 ml ascorbic acid (0.02% in 0.2 N HCl, made fresh daily). Vortex and let set 10 min.

Add 2.000 ml 30% ammonium acetate. Vortex. (pH needs to be >3 for color development)

⇓
⇓
Ash in furnace at ca 550
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓

Measure absorbance at 562 nm. Determine iron concentration in sample digest (μ g iron/ml) from standard curve.

Procedure for determination of iron in meat by colorimetry. [Adapted from (11).]

12-4
f i g u r e

210

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

sensor remains constant, while potentials develop at
the sensor surfaces according to the Nernst equation
(Sect. 13.3.2.2), dependent on sample ion activity in
the solutions contacting each surface.

Typically, the inside surface of the ion-selective
sensor is in contact with the negative reference elec-
trode (anode) via a ﬁlling solution having a constant
concentration of sample ion, while the outside sur-
face of the ion-selective sensor is in contact with
the positive reference electrode (cathode) via sample
solutions having varying concentration of sample ion.
Because sample ion activity of the internal solution is
ﬁxed, the potential varies across the sensor depend-
ing solely on the activity of sample ion in the sample
solution. As described by the Nernst equation, the
potential of the outside sensor surface increases by
0.059/nV (where n is the number of electrons involved
in the half reaction of the sample ion) for each tenfold
increase in activity of a mineral cation. Conversely,
the potential decreases by 0.059/nV for each tenfold
increase in activity of mineral anion. These changes
have a direct effect on the overall ISE potential because
the outside sensor surface is orientated toward the
positive reference electrode. Ion concentration is gen-
erally substituted for ion activity, which is a reasonable
approximation at low concentrations and controlled
ionic strength environments. Indeed, this is observed
within limitations set by electrode and instrumental
capabilities (Fig. 12-5).

12.3.4.2 GeneralMethodology
For ISE analysis, one simply attaches an ISE for the
sample ion to a pH meter set on the mV scale and
follows instructions for determination. However, the
performance of an ISE must be considered when ﬁrst

12-5
f i g u r e

Examples of ion-selective electrode calibration
curves for ions important in foods. (Courtesy
of Van London pHoenix Co., Houston, TX.)

selecting an electrode and later when designing sam-
pling and analysis protocols. Detailed information
regarding the performance of speciﬁc ISEs is avail-
able from vendor catalogs. Typical ISEs likely to be
employed for analysis of foods operate in the range
−6 M, although the electrode response may be
of 1–10
distinctly nonlinear at the lower concentrations.

Electrode performance is affected by the presence
of interfering ions, often with the strongest interfer-
ence from those ions having size and charge similar
to the ion of interest. Relative response of ISE to inter-
fering ions may be expressed as selectivity coefﬁcients
or as concentration of interfering ion that leads to
10% error. If the selectivity coefﬁcient relative to an
interfering ion is 1000 (i.e., the ISE is 1000-fold more
responsive to the sample ion than the interfering ion),
10% or greater error can be expected when measur-
ing μ M levels of the sample ion with interfering ion
present at mM levels. Most ISEs operate over a broad
pH range, although pH may need to be controlled for
best performance. Minimum response times for ISEs
fall in the range of 20 s to 1 min.

Despite inherent limitations of electrode design
and construction,
the analyst can adjust the sam-
ple and control measurement conditions to mini-
mize many practical problems that otherwise limit
the speciﬁcity and precision of ISEs. Because the ISE
responds to ionic activity,
it is important that the
activity coefﬁcient be kept constant in samples and
calibration standards. The activity coefﬁcient (γ) is
used to relate ion activity (A) to ion concentration (C)
(A = γC). Activity coefﬁcient is a function of ionic
strength, so ionic strength adjustment (ISA) buffers
are used to adjust the samples and standards to the
same ionic strength. These ISA buffers are commer-
cially available. The use of ISA buffers also adjusts the
pH, which may be necessary if H+ or OH
activities
affect the ion-speciﬁc sensor or if they interact with the
analyte. In the case of metals having insoluble hydrox-
ides, it is necessary to work at a pH that precludes their
precipitation. Depending on the selectivity of the ISE,
it may be necessary to remove interfering ions from the
sample by selective precipitation or complexation.

−

◦

In view of temperature effects on standard poten-
tials and slopes of electrodes (see Nernst Equation [8]
in Chap. 13),
it is important to keep the electrode
and solutions at a constant temperature. This may
involve working in a room that is thermostatically con-
trolled to 25
C (one of the internationally accepted
temperatures for electrochemical measurements), and
allowing sufﬁcient time for all samples and standards
to equilibrate to this temperature. Solutions should
be gently stirred during the measurement to attain
rapid equilibrium and to minimize concentration gra-
dients at the sensor surface. Finally, it is important
to allow sufﬁcient time for the electrode to stabilize

Chapter 12 • Traditional Methods for Mineral Analysis

211

before taking a reading. ISEs may not completely sta-
bilize within a practical timeframe, so a decision needs
to be made of when to take the reading. The reading
may be taken when the rate of change has fallen below
some predetermined value or at a ﬁxed time after the
electrode was placed in solution. A problem with the
latter is that many ISEs respond more rapidly, as sam-
ples are changed, to an increase in concentration of
sample ion as compared to a decrease in concentration
of sample ion.

12.3.4.3 ElectrodeCalibrationand
DeterminationofConcentration
In using an ISE, ion concentration can be determined
using either a calibration curve, standard addition, or
endpoint titration. It is common practice to develop a
calibration curve when working with an ISE because
it allows a large number of samples to be measured
rapidly. The electrode potential (volts) is developed
in a series of solutions of known concentration and
plotted on semilog paper against the standard con-
centrations. Examples of calibration curves for various
ions are given in Fig. 12-5. Upon analysis of a test
sample, the observed electrode potential is used to
determine ion concentration by referring to the calibra-
tion curve. Note the nonlinear region of the curve at
the lowest concentrations. Total ionic strength and the
concentration of interfering ions are especially impor-
tant factors limiting selective detection of low levels
of ions.

The standard addition method is of great value
when only a few samples are to be measured and
time does not permit the development of a calibra-
tion curve. This method also eliminates complex and
unknown background effects that cannot be replicated
when developing a calibration curve using standards.
The ISE is immersed in the sample and the resulting
voltage is recorded (Esample). An aliquot, or spike,
containing a known amount of the measured species
is added to the sample, and a second measurement
of electrode potential is determined (Espike). Con-
centration of active species in the original sample is
determined from the absolute difference in the volt-
age readings (ΔE = |Espike − Esample|) according to
the following relationship algebraically derived from
the Nernst equations.

CO =

CΔ

(10ΔE/S − 1)

[6]

where:

CO = original concentration of sample ion

(mol/L)

CΔ = change in sample ion concentration when

spike was added (mol/L)

12-6
f i g u r e

A typical T-type titration.
with permission.]

[From (2), used

E = difference in potential between the two

readings (V)

S = 0.059/number of electrons in the 1/2 reaction

of the sample ion

Finally, ISEs can be used to detect the endpoints
of titrations using species that form a precipitate or
strong complex with the sample ion.
If an ISE is
selected that detects titrant species, a T-type titration
curve results from the large increase in titrant activ-
ity detected at the equivalence point (see Fig. 12-6
for a cation titrant). If an ISE is selected that detects
the sample ion, an S-type titration curve results from
the removal of sample ion activity at the equivalence
point. In either case, sample concentration is calcu-
lated from titrant volume to reach the equivalence
point and the stoichiometric relationship between
titrant species and sample ion.

12.3.4.4 Applications
Some examples of applications of ISEs are salt and
nitrate in processed meats, salt content of butter and
cheese, calcium in milk, sodium in low-sodium ice
cream, carbon dioxide in soft drinks, potassium and
sodium levels in wine, and nitrate in canned vegeta-
bles. An ISE method applicable to foods containing
<100 mg sodium/100 g is an ofﬁcial method of AOAC
International (Method 976.25). This method employs
a sodium combination ISE, pH meter, magnetic stir-
rer, and a semilog graph paper for plotting a standard
curve. Obviously, there are many other applications,
but the above serve to demonstrate the versatility of
this valuable measuring tool.

A major advantage of

ISEs is their ability to
measure many anions and cations directly. Such mea-
surements are relatively simple compared to most
other analytical techniques, particularly because a pH
meter may be used as the voltmeter. Analyses are
independent of sample volume when making direct

212

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

measurements, while turbidity, color, and viscosity are
all of no concern.

A major disadvantage in the use of ISEs is their
inability to measure below 2–3 ppm, although there
are some electrodes that are sensitive down to 1 part
per billion. At low levels of measurement (below
−4 M), the electrode response time is slow. Finally,
10
some electrodes have had a high rate of premature
failure or a short operating life and possible excessive
noise characteristics.

12.4 COMPARISON OF METHODS

For labeling, processing, and even practical nutrition,
we are concerned only with a few minerals, which
generally can be analyzed by traditional methods. The
traditional methods available for mineral analysis are
varied, and only a very limited number of examples
have been given in this chapter. Choice of methods for
mineral analysis must be made considering method
performance regarding accuracy, sensitivity, detection
limit, speciﬁcity, and interferences. Information on
method performance is available from the collabora-
tive studies referenced with ofﬁcial methods (Chap. 1).
Other factors to be considered include cost per analy-
sis completed, equipment availability, and analytical
time compared to analytical volume.

Generally, for a small laboratory with skilled ana-
lytical personnel, the traditional methods can be car-
ried out rapidly, with accuracy, and at minimal costs.
If a large number of samples of a speciﬁc element
are to be run, there is certainly a time factor in favor
of using atomic absorption spectroscopy or emission
spectroscopy, depending on the mineral being ana-
lyzed. The graphite furnace on the atomic absorption
spectrophotometer is capable of sensitivity in the parts
per billion range. This is beyond the limits of the
traditional methods. However, for most minerals of
practical concern in the food industry, this degree of
sensitivity is not required.

Modern instrumentation has made it possible to
quantify an entire spectrum of minerals in one process,
some into the parts per billion range. Instrumentation
capable of such analysis is expensive and beyond the
ﬁnancial resources of many quality assurance labora-
tories. Large numbers of samples to be analyzed may
justify the automation of some routine analyses and
perhaps the expense of some of the modern pieces of
equipment. However, the requirements for only occa-
sional samples to be analyzed for a speciﬁc mineral
will not justify the initial costs of much instrumenta-
tion. This leaves the options of sending samples out to
certiﬁed laboratories for analysis or utilizing one of the
more traditional methods for analysis.

12.5 SUMMARY

The mineral content of water and foodstuffs is impor-
tant because of their nutritional value, toxicological
potential, and interactive effects with processing and
texture of some foods. Traditional methods for min-
eral analysis include titrimetric and colorimetric pro-
cedures. The basic principles of these methods are
described in this chapter, along with discussion of ISE
methodology that has general application for mineral
analysis.

Procedures are described in this chapter that illus-
trate use of these traditional methods to quantify
minerals of concern in the food industry. These pro-
cedures generally require chemicals and equipment
routinely available in an analytical laboratory and do
not require expensive instrumentation. These meth-
ods may be suited to a small laboratory with skilled
analytical personnel and a limited number of sam-
ples to be analyzed. The traditional procedures will
often perform similarly to procedures requiring more
instrumentation and may be more robust in actual
practice.

Foods are typically ashed prior to traditional anal-
yses because the methods generally require that the
minerals be freed from the organic matrix of the foods.
Sample preparation and analysis must include steps
necessary to prevent contamination or loss of volatile
elements and must deal with a variety of poten-
tial interferences. Various approaches are described
to account for these possible errors including use of
reagent blanks, addition of spikes, and development
of standard curves using appropriate mineral matrix
background.

Traditional methods for mineral analysis are often
automated or adapted to test kits for rapid analysis.
Tests for water hardness and the Quantab R(cid:2)
for salt
determination are examples currently being used. The
basic principles involved in traditional methods will
continue to be utilized to develop inexpensive rapid
methods for screening mineral content of foods and
beverages. Familiarity with the traditional principles
will allow the food analyst to obtain the best possible
performance with the kits and adapt to problems that
may be encountered.

12.6 STUDY QUESTIONS

1. What is the major concern in sample preparation for
speciﬁc mineral analysis? How can this concern be
addressed?

2. If the ammonia buffer is pH 11.5 rather than pH 10
in the EDTA complexometric titration to determine the
hardness of water, would you expect to overestimate or
underestimate the hardness? Explain your answer.

Chapter 12 • Traditional Methods for Mineral Analysis

213

3. This chapter includes descriptions of the EDTA com-
plexometric titration method and ISE methodology for
quantifying calcium. Differentiate these techniques with
regard to the principles involved, and discuss primary
advantages and disadvantages of these two techniques.

4. The Mohr and Volhard titration methods often are used
to determine the NaCl content of foods. Compare and
contrast these two methods, as you explain the principles
involved.

5. In a back-titration procedure, would overshooting the
endpoint in the titration cause an over- or underestima-
tion of the compound being quantiﬁed? Explain your
answer.

6. Describe how and why to employ standards in back-

ground matrix, spikes, and reagent blanks.

7. Explain the principles of using an ISE to measure the
concentration of a particular inorganic element in food.
List the factors to control, consider, or eliminate for an
accurate measure of concentration by the ISE method.

8. You have decided to purchase an ISE to monitor the
sodium content of foods produced by your plant. List the
advantages this would have over the Mohr/Volhard titra-
tion method. List the problems and disadvantages of ISE
that you should anticipate.

9. What factors should be considered in selecting a speciﬁc

method for mineral analysis for a food product?

12.7 PRACTICE PROBLEMS

1. If a given sample of food yields 0.750 g of silver chlo-
ride in a gravimetric analysis, what weight of chloride is
present?

2. A 10-g food sample was dried, then ashed, and ana-
lyzed for salt (NaCl) content by the Mohr titration method
(AgNO3 + Cl → AgCl). The weight of the dried sam-
ple was 2 g, and the ashed sample weight was 0.5 g. The
entire ashed sample was titrated using a standardized
AgNO3 solution. It took 6.5 ml of the AgNO3 solution
to reach the endpoint, as indicated by the red color of
Ag2CO4 when K2CrO4 was used as an indicator. The
AgNO3 solution was standardized using 300 mg of dried
KCl as described in Fig. 12-2. The corrected volume of
AgNO3 solution used in the titration was 40.9 ml. Calcu-
late the salt (NaCl) content of the original food sample as
percent NaCl (wt/wt).

3. A 25-g food sample was dried, then ashed, and ﬁnally
analyzed for salt (NaCl) content by the Volhard titration
method. The weight of the dried sample was 5 g, and the
ashed sample weighed 1 g. Then 30 ml of 0.1 N AgNO3
was added to the ashed sample, the resultant precipitate
was ﬁltered out, and a small amount of ferric ammonium
sulfate was added to the ﬁltrate. The ﬁltrate was then
titrated with 3 ml of 0.1 N KSCN to a red endpoint.
(a) What was the moisture content of

the sample,

expressed as percent H2O (wt/wt)?

(b) What was the ash content of the sample, expressed as

percent ash (wt/wt) on a dry weight basis?

(c) What was the salt content of the original sample in
terms of percent (wt/wt) NaCl? (molecular weight
Na = 23; molecular weight Cl = 35.5)

4. Compound X in a food sample was quantiﬁed by a col-
orimetric assay. Use the following information and Beer’s
law to calculate the content of Compound X in the food
sample, in terms of mg Compound X/100 g sample:
(a) A 4-g sample was ashed.
(b) Ashed sample was dissolved with 1 ml of acid and the

volume brought to 250 ml.

(c) A 0.75-ml aliquot was used in a reaction in which
the total volume of the sample to be read in the
spectrophotometer was 50 ml.

(d) Absorbance at 595 nm for the sample was 0.543.
(e) The absorptivity constant for the reaction (i.e., extinc-

tion coefﬁcient) was known to be 1574 L/M cm.

(f) Inside diameter of cuvette for spectrophotometer was

1 cm.

5. Colorimetric analysis

(a) You are using a colorimetric method to determine the
concentration of Compound A in your liquid food
sample. This method allows a sample volume of 5 ml.
This volume must be held constant but can comprise
diluted standard solution and water. For this standard
curve, you need standards that contain 0, 0.25, 0.50,
0.75, and 1.0 mg of Compound A. Your stock standard
solution contains 5 g/L of Compound A.

Devise a dilution scheme(s) for preparing the sam-
ples for this standard curve that could be followed by
a lab technician. Be speciﬁc. In preparing the dilution
scheme, use no volumes less than 0.5 ml.

(b) You obtain the following absorbance values for your

standard curve:

Sample(mg)

Absorbance(500nm)

0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00

0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80

Construct a standard curve and determine the equa-
tion of the line.

(c) A 5-ml sample is diluted to 500 ml, and 3 ml of this
solution is analyzed as per the standard samples; the
absorbance of 0.50 units at 500 nm. Use the equation
of the line calculated in part (b) and information about
the dilutions to calculate what the concentration is of
Compound A in your original sample in terms of g/L.
6. What is the original concentration of copper in a 100-ml
sample that shows a potential change of 6 mV after the
addition of 1 ml of 0.1 M Cu(NO3)2?

Answers
1.

x g Cl

0.750 g AgCl

= 35.45 g/mol
143.3 g/mol

x = 0.186 g Cl

214

2.

NAgNO3 =

0.0984 N =

Percent salt

(cid:5)

=

0.300 g KCl
× 74.555 g KCl/mol

ml AgNO3
0.300 g

40.9 ml × 74.555

0.0065 L × 0.0984 N AgNO3

10 g

× 58.5 g/mol

(cid:6)

× 100

Percent salt = 0.37%

3.

(a)

(b)

25 g wet sample − 5 g dry sample

25 g wet sample

× 100 = 80%

1 g ash

5 g dry sample

× 100 = 20%

−

(c) mol Ag added = mol Cl

in sample

−

added

+mol SCN
mol Ag = (0.1 mol/L) × (0.03 L) = 0.003 mol
mol SCN
0.003 mol Ag = mol Cl
−
0.0027 mol = mol Cl

−= (0.1 mol/L) × (0.003 L) − 0.0003 mol

+ 0.0003 mol SCN

−

−

(0.0027 mol Cl

−

) × 58.5 g NaCl

mol

= 0.1580 g NaCl

0.1580 g NaCl
25 g wet sample

= 0.00632 g NaCl
g wet sample

× 100

= 0.63% NaCl (w/w)

4.

5.

A = abc

0.543 = (1574 L g

−1 cm

−1)(1 cm) c

c = 3.4498 × 10
c = 3.4498 × 10
3.4498 × 10
−4 mg
ml
1.725 × 10
−2 mg
0.75 ml

−4 g/L
−4 mg/ml
× 50 ml = 1.725 × 10
× 250 ml
4 g

= 1.437 mg/g
= 143.7 mg/100 g

(a) Lowest dilution volume for 1 ml of stock:

0.25 mg
0.5 ml

= 1 ml
x ml
x = 10 ml

× 5 mg
ml

Therefore, use a volumetric pipette to add 1 ml of stock to
a 10-ml volumetric ﬂask. Bring to volume with ddH20 to

Part II • Compositional Analysis of Foods

give a diluted stock solution of 0.25 mg/0.5 ml. Use this
to make up standards according to the following table.

mlDiluted

mgA/5ml stocksolution ml H2O

0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0

5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0

0
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

mg A/5 ml

Equation of the line: y = 0.8x + 0

(b)

A500

(c)

A500 = 0.50 = y
0.50 = 0.8x+0

x = 0.625

0.625 mg

5 ml

× 5 ml
3 ml

× 500 ml
5 ml

= 20.8 mg/ml
= 20.8 g/L

6.

CO =

−2 mg

0.001 L × 0.001 moles

×
100.006/0.0285 − 1

L

1

0.100 L

= 1.6 mM

12.8 REFERENCES

1. Schwendt G (1997) The essential guide to analytical

chemistry. Wiley, New York

2. Kirk RS, Sawyer R (1991) Pearson’s composition and
analysis of foods, 9th edn. Longman Scientiﬁc and Tech-
nical, Essex, England

3. Skoog DA, West DM, Holler JF, Crouch SR (2000) Ana-
lytical chemistry: an introduction, 7th edn. Brooks/Cole,
Paciﬁc Grove, CA

4. Harris DC (1999) Quantitative chemical analysis, 5th

edn. W.H. Freeman and Co., New York

5. AOAC International (2007) Ofﬁcial methods of analy-
sis, 18th edn., 2005; Current through revision 2, 2007
(On-line). AOAC International, Gaithersburg, MD

Chapter 12 • Traditional Methods for Mineral Analysis

215

6. Sullivan DM, Carpenter DE (eds) (1993) Methods of
analysis for nutritional labeling. AOAC International,
Arlington, VA

7. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine (1997)
Dietary reference intakes for calcium, phosphorus, mag-
nesium, vitamin D, and ﬂuoride. National Academy
Press, Washington, DC

8. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine (2000)
Dietary reference intakes for vitamin C, vitamin E,
selenium, and carotenoids. National Academy Press,
Washington, DC

9. Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine (2002)
Dietary reference intakes for vitamin A, vitamin K,
arsenic, boron, chromium, copper, iodine, iron, man-
ganese, molybdenum, nickel, silicon, vanadium, and
zinc. National Academy Press, Washington, DC

10. Eaton AD, Clesceri LS, Rice EW, Greenburg AE (eds)
(2005) Standard methods for the examination of water
and wastewater, 21st edn. Method 2340, hardness.
American Public Health Association, American Water
Works Association, Water Environment Federation,
Washington, DC, pp 2–37 to 2–39

11. Carpenter C, Clark E (1995) Evaluation of iron methods
used in meat iron analysis and iron content of raw and
cooked meats. J Agric Food Chem 43:1824–1827

12. Covington AK (ed)

(1980)

Ion selective electrode

methodology. CRC, Boca Raton, FL

13. Wang J (2000) Analytical electrochemistry, 2nd edn.

Wiley, New York

